"Having heard Hanuman's words, full of love, Rama replied. "

'"Hanuman You have performed a mighty task indeed, which is difficult even to think of in this world and not possible for any one else on this earth."  '

'"None else than Garuda or Vayu have I seen to have crossed this great ocean crossed by you, Hanuman."'

'"Indeed, who has the strength to return alive after entering that city highly protected by Ravana. It is unimaginable even for devas, danavas, yakshas, gandharvas, uragas and rakshasas to cross."'

'"Except for Hanuman, who is abounding in valour and strength, it is not possible for others to enter the inaccessible Lanka highly protected by rakshasas."'

'"Hanuman, with his mighty form and valour not only carried out a great task assigned by Sugriva but also what had to be done as duty." '

'"He, who carries out  a formidable task entrusted to him by the master, with love is  said to be the best among men."'

'An efficient servant does not only do what is asked but also does the work dear to the king. One who does not do so is said to be mediocre.'

'"If one who is capable and efficient has been entrusted with a task by a king and fails to do the work agreed to, is said to be a lowly person."'

'"Having done the task assigned to him, Hanuman carried out what had to be done and accomplished without difficulty. This made Sugriva also happy."  '

'"On Hanuman finding Vaidehi, I and, mighty Lakshmana and the whole of Raghu dynasty are now rightfully protected."'

'"On the other hand, it is a pity that I am not able to please such a person who has spoken pleasing words. Further this causes grief to me."'

'"To such a great one who attained success at this time, everything can be given. I give my embrace."  '

'Having said so, Rama experienced the joy of love all over his body and embraced Hanuman who returned successful.'

'Rama, the delight of Raghu dynasty thought over and said while Sugriva, the lord of monkeys was still listening.'

'"By all means good work was done in searching for Sita. On the contrary, having succeeded, my mind is once again agitated when I think of (crossing) the ocean."'

'"How will all the monkeys together be able to cross to the southern shore of the vast ocean? It is difficult to cross."'

'"This has been told to me by Vaidehi. How will the monkeys cross the ocean(enquired Vaidehi)."'

'Agitated with sorrow, mighty armed Rama, the destroyer of enemies approached Hanuman and reflected (about the crossing of the ocean).                            ', 'इत्यार्षे श्रीमद्रामायणे वाल्मीकीये आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे प्रथमस्सर्गः ', 'This is the end of the first Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Glorious Sugriva spoke such words of advice to remove the agony of Rama,son of Dasaratha, who was filled with sorrow.'

'"Heroic Rama Why are you grieving like a common man? Give up your grief just like an ungrateful one gives up friendship."'

'"Raghava Having secured the information (of Sita) and known the location of the enemy\'s residence, I do not see the reason for your mourning."'

'"Raghava You are an intellectual, well versed in Sastras, wise and learned. Give up this sinful thought just as the one who is efficient gives up the one who violates subtle truth." '

'"If we cross over that ocean infested with huge crocodiles and ascend the fortress of Lanka, know that the enemy is killed."'

'"One who is despondent, dejected and overwhelmed with grief, will be dispirited in all matters. Not only that with worry he will meet with disaster."'

'All these vanara leaders and heroes are highly capable and for your happiness they are even ready to enter fire. I know this from their joy and I even infer that it is certain (to happen).'

'"You ought to work such that we would kill that enemy Ravana of sinful deeds with our prowess and get back  Sita. I hope you are capable of doing that."'

'"Raghava You think that we will be building a bridge and then seeing that city of the king of Rakshasas."'

'"If the city of Lanka situated on top of Trikuta mountain is seen, you can be sure that Ravana is killed."'

'"Without building a bridge on that dreadful ocean, the abode of Varuna, it is not possible for suras or asuras accompanied by Indra also to crush Lanka." '

'"On building a bridge over the large ocean up to Lanka, when all my army of vanaras can cross over, you may consider that you have won. These vanaras are heroic in war and can assume any form at will."'

'"O king, therefore enough of this agitated feeling which destroys everything. In this world the valiance of man is lost if he is sorrowful." '

'"Just as heroism follows a human being in this world on accomplishing a task, you who are very wise, should resort to courage and valour and rise up."'

'"If you who are great among the valiant ones worry for that which is destroyed or lost, it would lead to disaster of everything." '

'"You are highly intelligent, foremost among those who are wellversed in the meaning of all shastras. You will conquer your enemy along with friends like me."'

'"O Raghava When you hold the bow in war, Indeed  who can stand in front of you in the three worlds. I have not seen."'

'"The task of yours entrusted to vanaras will never be spoiled. Very soon you will see Sita crossing over the ocean that cannot be subdued."'

'"O Lord of earth Enough of that pain you have experienced. Give up sorrow and take on to anger. When kshatriyas are lethargic, they become dull but all are scared at a fearful one."'

'"You are endowed with subtle intellect and now think of the means to cross over this dreadful looking ocean the lord of rivers."'

'"If the vanara army can cross (the ocean) you are certain that we will conquer. Presume that the army has succeeded."'

'"Being heroic in combat, these vanaras can take any form at their will.They would rain boulders and trees on enemies and cut them to size."'

'"O Exterminator of foes By whatever means the ocean is crossed by us, think that the enemy has been killed in combat."'

'"Of what use is speaking many words. By all means you will be victorious. I see signs of it and feel highly delighted in my mind."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वितीयस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the second Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic,the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Rama the scion of Kakuthsa dynasty having accepted the wellmeaning words of Sugriva, who spoke the truth with deep understanding, turned to Hanuman and said.'

'"By austerity or by drying up the ocean or by any other means, I am capable of crossing the ocean." '

'"O Vanara How many forts are in Lanka? You may tell me whatever you have seen. I wish to know all that."'

'"Tell me in detail about the strength and size of the army, the number of gateways that are difficult to enter, the way in which the entrances have been protected by the rakshasas, and their dwellings in Lanka. Indeed you are aware of all aspects and are also capable." '

"Hanuman the son of Maruti, the foremost among those who are good at speech, having heard Rama's words again said to Rama."

'"I will relate the way in which the city of Lanka is fortified, the way in which it is protected by secret forces, everything you wish to hear." '

'Hanuman, the foremost of the vanaras said that he will truly point out everything in Lanka:"Ravana\'s power, the affection of rakshasas to Ravana, his prosperity, the terrifying ocean, the divisions of the army such as chariots, elephants, horses and soldiers."'

'"The people in the vast island of Lanka are very delighted. Lanka is filled with chariots and innumerable rakshasas."'

'"Lanka is endowed with lofty wide courtyards, entrances with doors that are fixed with metal fixtures and large iron bars."'

'"The doors are fitted with powerful machines which retaliate by discharging darts and stones on the enemy\'s army and kill them."'

'At the entrances are troops of terrific looking guards kept ready with a hundred sharpened stones studded with iron spikes.'

'"Its lofty golden boundary wall encrusted here and there with gems, corals, Vaiduryas and pearls is difficult to assail."'

'All round it (boundary wall) are very splendid moats filled with frighteningcold water inhabited by fish and crocodiles.'

'At the entrance of the gateways around the moats are four road ways. Huge engines are fixed to move the bridges when people approach. There are rows of houses (for the guards) at the gateways.'

'"When the enemy arrives, the engines all over the moats lift the bridges making entry impossible for enemy armies."'

'"One of the road ways is very strong and steady, shining with unshakeable golden pillars and altars."'

'"O Rama Ravana, who is hostile in his intentions, assuming his natural tendency which is eagerness to combat, is always very alert and looks after the army."'

'"Lanka is difficult to access even for devatas located on high peaks of the mountain. It is fierce to onlookers, surrounded by four kinds of forts, like rivers, mountains, forests and artificial fortresses."  '

'"O Raghava Lanka is located on the other shore of the ocean. Passage through the sea is not possible. It is away from all and there is nothing around."'

'"It is inaccessible like the abode of devatas as it is on the peak of the mountain. It is difficult to conquer for any one as it is full of horses and elephants." '

'"Evil minded Ravana\'s city of Lanka is shining with moats and missiles of many kinds and machinery."'

'"There(in Lanka) ten thousand warriors are garrisoned at the eastern gate way holding tridents, and those who are unassailable in war stand in front with swords." '

'At the southern gate also one lakh of rakshasas are garrisoned with four divisions of army. They are also the best warriors.'

'At the western gate are garrisoned ten lakhs of rakshasas wearing shields of skin and holding swords. They are knowledgeable in several weapons.'

'At the northern gate(of Lanka) are garrisoned one hundred crores of rakshasas constituting, charioteers, horse riding and elephant riding ogres born of noble families, respected and trustworthy (for Ravana).'

'"Hundreds and thousands of warriors who are unassailable are collected in the center(of Lanka) in multitudes of crores."'

'"I have destroyed some of those roadways, even filled up the moats, burnt parts of the city of Lanka, smashed the boundary walls and killed part of the powerful army."'

'"If by whatever means the passage of ocean can be crossed by vanaras it can be taken for granted that the city of Lanka is destroyed."'

'"Raghava What do we have to do with the rest of the army when Angada, Dwivida, Mainda, Jambavan, Panasa, Nala and the chief of the army Nila are there? Reaching Ravana\'s city by leaping over the mountains and demolishing the outer gates, other boundaries, archways and other buildings they will get into Lanka city."'

'"You may command the total army this way."Quickly start at an opportune time towards Lanka (said Hanuman to Rama)" commanded Hanuman."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेतृतीयस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the third Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Glorious Rama, of truthful valour, having heard Hanuman in the aforesaid manner, there after spoke (to Hanuman).'

'I will destroy immediately that Lanka of fierce rakshasa, you are telling. I am telling you, this is the truth.'

'I desire to journey at this opportune time. The Sun has reached the mid position and so a good time for victory. '

'Where can the one who has abducted Sita go from here? Just as one who has drunk the poison gets some life sometimes on tasting the nectar of immortality, Sita will attain the desire to live on hearing about my approaching.'

'Today Uttaraphalguni constellation is on the ascent and for me born in Punarvasu star, Hasta, will be in conjunction with the moon. Sugriva You may assemble all the army as I desire to start the journey (as it is auspicious for me). '

"I also see manifestations of good omens to start (the journey). I shall get Janaka's daughter Sita on killing Ravana."

'My upper eyelids are twitching thus indicating victory and it strikes me that my desire will be fulfilled.'

'There after righteous Rama who is well respected by the king of vanaras and also by Lakshmana, who is wellversed in polity once again spoke.  '

'"Let Nila go leading in front with his courageous and hundred thousand army looking at the way (said Rama)".'

'"O Nila, the chief of the army Go fast with the army along the way which has plenty of fruits and roots, shady forests and cool water and sweet smelling honey".'

'"Evilminded one, the lord of rakshasas will spoil the roots, fruits and water (on the way). Be ever alert and protect them".'

'"O Vanaras You should even look for (the rakshasas) in the low lying lands, in inaccessible water sources, in forests and also beyond sight leaping up to the sky". '

'"If there are any weak ones in the army, they may be used here for this purpose (of looking for fruits etc.). Our task (ahead) is a terrific one and be prepared to overcome your power".  '

'"These hundreds and thousands of lionlike vanaras would walk in groups leading the army like the fierce tides of the ocean".'

'"Gaja who is like a mountain in form, Gavaya, the mighty strong and Gavaksha would go like proud bulls that lead the cows".'

'"Let the vanara called Rshaba the foremost among the leaping vanaras, take charge of the right side of the army".'

'"Let Gandhamadana, the unassailable and powerful vanara resembling the elephant in rut take charge of the left portion of the army".'

'"Like the lord of gods riding on Iravatam I would mount on Hanuman and reach the centre of the army encouraging the army."'

'"Let Lakshmana who is like Anthaka (one who excels death) ride on Angada, like the lord of wealth (Kubera) rides on the elephant Saarvabhauma (the elephant that guards the four quarters)".'

'"Let Rksharaja the mighty strong Jambavan and Sushena even Vegadarsi protect the rear side (of the army)".'

'Sugriva the bull among vanaras having heard the words of Raghava ordered the heroic vanaras (to start).'

'Then all the heroic monkeys who were eager for combat jumped down from the caves, mountain peaks and trees.'

'Thereafter righteous Rama who was worshipped by the king of vanaras and Lakshmana went towards the southern direction.'

'Protected by hundreds and thousands, even crores of vanaras and surrounded by a myriad of vanaras Rama went.'

'While Rama was walking the great army of vanaras controlled by Sugriva followed him with great delight.'

'The monkeys went towards southern direction playing, leaping, running and roaring like lions. '

'The monkeys went eating sweet smelling honey and fruits and carrying branches of huge trees having bunches of blossoms.'

'Some wild monkeys carried one another, while some fell, knocked down others, some lifted up and some turned their back and pushed down others.'

"'We should kill all the rakshasas and Ravana', saying so the vanaras close by Rama were roaring."

'Heroic Rshaba, Nila and even Kumuda together with many vanaras were searching on the way.'

'Sugriva, Rama and Lakshmana marched in the middle surrounded by powerful and fierce vanaras who can destroy the enemy. '

'Sathavali alone encircled by hundred crore vanara heroes was protecting the army of vanaras.'

'Kesari, Panasa, Gaja, Atibala, Arka and their army of one hundred crores were protecting the army on one side.'

'Sushena, and Jambavan surrounded by the army of Rshaba were guarding by placing on the western side.'

'Nila, the heroic chief of the army who was foremost in the act of flying and descending was going around and controlling.'

'Valiant Darimukha, Prajhanga, Rambha and Rabhasa went about jumping cheering all vanaras.'

'Those vanaras who were tigers among vanaras, proud of their might went to see (on their way) the Sahya Mountains, the foremost of the mountains with trees and creepers, lakes and ponds with fully blossomed lotuses.'

"The dreadful vanara army expansive as the ocean went knowing about the fear of Rama's wrath. They went avoiding parts of cities and villages making frightening sounds like the great sound of the waves of the ocean."

"The heroic and best of the monkeys galloped swiftly on the command of Dasaratha's son like horses that are driven like the steeds."

'When Rama and Lakshmana, the best among men were borne by Hanuman and Angada they were shining like the planets Jupiter and Venus conjoined with Sun and Moon.'

'Then righteous Rama who is worshipped by the king of vanaras and by Lakshmana went with the army towards the southern direction.'

'Lakshmana, who was borne by Angada, has a good memory and sense of intuition. Set to accomplish his desire fully, he spoke to Rama these auspicious words.'

'Rama After killing Ravana and attaining the desired object of recovering Vaidehi you would go to Ayodhya having accomplished your objective.  '

'Raghava I am seeing good signs in the sky and also on land indicating auspicious signs of the accomplishment of your desire. The wind is also favourable and agreeable to the moving army.'

'The sounds of these animals and birds are very sweet. The directions are pleasing, and the Sun is shining brightly.'

'Bhargava who is the master of all knowledge and Sukra, the regent of planet Venus shines brightly behind you. The seven sages who are pure and glowing like fire in brilliance are going round Dhruva. '

'Among the great kings of the Ikshvaku dynasty, the grandfather Trisanku who is a royal sage shines clearly along with Vasishta the foremost priest.'

'The best of stars, Visakha of the highsouled Ikshvakus which is unconnected shines brightly.'

'The star called Niruta (of rakshasas) in the southwest is highly tormented by the touch of the Mula star (close to it) and is oppressed.'

'Everything has sprung up for the destruction of rakshasas. Those that are caught up by death will be oppressed at the time of death.'

'The water is pure and of good taste. The forests are filled with fruits. The wind with fragrance is not blowing excessively or violently. The trees are in bloom beyond season.'

'O King This army of vanaras placed in order is like the forces of gods in their battle with Taraka (a rakshasa who was killed in a battle by Karthikeya) and shines very much. O king, reviewing these (arrangements of army) you ought to be pleased (said Lakshmana to Rama).  '

'Saumithri reassured his brother who was surrounded by the vanara force saying that those vanaras who use their nails and teeth as weapons and tigerlike bears spread all over the expansive land are proceeding.'

"The terrible dust risen up by the (stamping) legs and hands of the vanara troops spread all over is keeping off Sun's radiance as if creating fear.Alas, the frightening army of vanaras went spreading all over the mountains and forests like the spread of clouds over the sky."

'When the army was continuously crossing the river, later (after they crossed) the water flowed excessively like flood.'

'The vanaras went through the pellucid waters of the centre of the lakes. They went obliquely at the mountains, walked on plain lands and underneath trees filled with fruits, plucking them and eating. '

'The great vanara army spread all over the land went with the swiftness of wind with cheerful faces.'

'For the purpose of Rama, the vanaras went showing their valour, happiness and prowess charged with emotion towards one another on the way. They showed their joy and spirit to one another exhibiting their natural youthful enthusiasm, arrogance and several other gestures.'

"Being vanaras some went swiftly, some jumped, and some others made sound 'kila kila'(the usual sounds of monkeys) while they went. "

'Some hit their tails on the ground, some stamped their feet on the ground, some crushed the mountains with their arms and some broke the trees.'

'Vanaras, being the inhabitants of mountains, climbed on peaks of mountains and made loud noises like snapping and roaring like lions. Some went round and round.'

'With the speed of their shaking thighs, the vanaras broke several meshes of creepers. While yawning also some showed their courage by whirling round and throwing stones and trees.'

'Formidable vanaras in hundreds, thousands, lakhs and crores spread in a splendid manner around the land.'

'The mighty vanara force protected by Sugriva from all sides cheerful at heart, walked day and night speedily. Being eager to somehow liberate Sita they were happy about war and stood nowhere for a while.'

'Thereafter having reached the dense forest filled with trees surrounded by the Malaya and Sahaya Mountain inhabited by different kinds of animals, the vanaras assembled. '

'Rama too went to see the wonderful woods and streams of rivers of Sahaya mountain.'

'The vanaras went adoring the Vakula, Tilaka, Mango, Asoka, Tinisa, Sinduvara and Karaveera trees.'

'Vanaras went adoring the Ankola, Karanja, Plaksa, Nyagrodha, Jambu,Amla and neepa trees.'

'Many kinds of trees standing on beautiful rocks and of the forest shaken by the fury of the wind showered their flowers on the vanaras.'

'As the bees humming in delight were spreading the sweet fragrance of honey accompanied the breeze that blew, it was cool like the cool touch of sandal (to the vanaras).'

'That lord of mountains richly adorned with minerals shone very brightly. The mineral particles raised by the stamping of the vanara troops covered the huge vanaras all over.'

'In the mountain ranges were well blossomed trees  such as Kethaka, Sinduvaara and Mango trees Manorama, Madhavi, Kunda, Gulma creepers filled with blossoms of fragrance Chiribilva, Madhuka like wild trees,Vajula,Vakula ,Ranjaka, Tilaka,Kuruvaka, Naga trees Patalaya trees trees with red flowers Arjuna, Simsupa trees with white flowers Kutaja, Dhava and Salmala, Red Kurana, Hinthala,Tinisa,and Churanaka trees, so also dark flowered Asoka trees, Pine trees, Ankola and Padmaka trees were convenient for the monkeys to shake and jump.'

'In the mountains were reservoirs of water and ponds with cool water inhabited by flocks of Chakravaka birds, water birds like ravens and Krauncha birds. The woodlands were terrific, frequented by boars, bears, hyenas, lions and frightening tigers and many kinds of wild elephants. With flowers in full bloom, the white, blue and red lotuses in the lakes were delightful.'

'At that time different kinds of flocks of birds were singing in the mountain ranges. The vanaras after having taken their bath were drinking and sporting with water with each other (pouring water over another) climbing up the mountain.'

'Then the vanaras who were deluded with pride climbed the trees and ate the fruits with nectar like aroma, roots and flowers.'

'The tawnyeyed monkeys went joyfully drinking the honey from the large honeycombs hanging there.'

'The vanaras (who are best among leaping animals) went smashing the trees, pulling out the creepers and purposefully destroying the mountains (on their way). '

'While some monkeys that were intoxicated by drinking excessive honey walked where there were no trees, others climbed the tree tops and jumped.'

'That land filled completely with the vanara heroes seemed like a fully ripe paddy field.'

'At that time Lotuseyed Rama of mighty shoulders climbed up the the top of mountain Mahendra adorned with beautiful trees.'

'Then Rama the son of Dasaratha on climbing to the top (of Mahendra mountain) observed the ocean inhabited by tortoises and fish. '

'The vanaras crossing over the great Sahya and Malaya mountains one after another reached near the frightening ocean. '

'Rama, who causes delight to others, got down (the mountain) along with Lakshmana and Sugriva and soon reached the wood on the sea coast.'

'Atonce Rama sprung from there (top of mountain) on to an extensive surface of the earth polished by the waves of the ocean spoke these words on reaching there. '

'Sugriva We have reached the ocean and now we have to think of that idea now, which we thought of earlier.'

'There is only the ocean, the lord of rivers, and the shore is beyond this. We cannot cross the ocean without any mode.'

'We will have to leave the army of vanaras here itself. We have to deliberate how to get the vanaras to the other shore.'

'On seeing the ocean, the mightyarmed Rama, tormented by the abduction of Sita in that way, ordered about the quartering of the vanaras.'

'"O Best of monkeys Now make preparation for all the army to reside at the sea coast. The time to deliberate about crossing the ocean has set in."'

'"None of the army should go wherever leaving the parasol. The vanara warriors should keep guarding and you may know that it is dangerous". '

"Having heard Rama's words, Sugriva and Lakshmana made the army to reside on the sea shore filled with trees."

'That vast (sea of) army of monkeys in tawny colour (settled) at the proximity of the sea (that was white) seemed like a prosperous second sea in bright colour. '

'Then the heroic monkeys having arrived at the forest close to the ocean stood there desiring to reach the other shore.'

'The noise of the ocean was drowned by the great sound produced by the assembly of the army quartered there.'

'The three army groups of vanaras protected by Sugriva encamped for the purpose of Rama appeared enthusiastic. '

'Having arrived at the great ocean and seeing the ocean lashed by the fury of the wind the vanaras felt rejoiced.'

"On seeing the expansive ocean, the vanara army thought 'how to cross the abode of rain god whose shores are far away and not connected and is protected by rakshasas'?  "

'As the day was ending and night was setting in, the ocean filled with crocodiles which could catch any animal looked terrific and its waves seemed as if it were laughing and dancing. '

'At the time of the moon rise, the lofty ocean inhabited by dark swift crocodiles, huge Timingala fish scattered in it was rising up with several images of moon reflected in its water. '

'Filled with serpents glowing with flaming gems on hoods, the abode of Varuna (was like underworld) with huge snakes and different mountains under water is a difficult path inaccessible and a fathomless abode of rakshasas (vanaras thought).  '

'Swarmed with sea animals like sharks and crocodiles and serpents were jumping with huge volumes of water rising and down with force by the stormy wind.'

'The sea that was the domain of snakes was shining as though sparks of fire from the sky penetrated the drops of sea water.'

'The ocean resembled the sky and the sky like the ocean were identical as no difference appeared. '

'The ocean and the sky filled with gems and stars respectively appeared alike.'

'There was no distinction between the sky with rising clouds and the ocean with moving waves.  '

'The waves of the ocean striking each other making frightening sounds like the blowing of war horns seemed as if challenging each other.'

'The enthusiastic vanaras saw the sea inhabited by animals filled with gems and water concentrated in one place rising to the sky, as though infuriated. The rising of the waves (the noise) of the ocean by the cause of wind seemed as if they were talking about. '

'The vanaras were wonder struck when they saw the ocean that was noisy with rolling waves as if it was highly agitated and distressed.', '।।इत्यार्षे वाल्मीकीये श्रीमद्रामायणे आदिकाव्ये युद्धकाण्डे चतुर्थस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the fourth Sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Nila settled the army successfully by making them reside on the northern shore of the sea, as per tradition. '

'Dwivida and Mainda, the best of the vanaras, went about in all directions for safeguarding the army.'

'After the army had settled down on the shores of the lord of rivers (sea), Rama spoke to Lakshmana who stood beside him.'

'As time passes, grief passes away. However my sorrow is progressing day by day being unable to see my beloved.'

'There is no grief in me that my beloved is at a distance, nor that she is taken away. Indeed her age is advancing. On this account I am feeling for her.'

"O Wind Touch that place where my beloved is and touch me as it will give me the same feeling as my beloved's touch. Through the moon I will get her eye contact too."

"While being carried away that beloved of mine would have cried aloud saying 'oh my lord'. This thought is burning my body as though I have consumed poison in my stomach."

'The pain of separation from her is working as fuel and the thought about hers is engulfing me as extensive flame and burning my body day and night.'

'O Saumitri Plunging into water alone I will lie down. Probably then the god of love will not be able to consume me while sleeping.'

'Me and Sita are seeking refuge on the same land indeed. Because of that only survival is possible for me, who is desiring for her very much.'

'I am living only because of hearing about her survival, just as a paddy field without water gets wet by the proximity of a neighboring paddy field with water.'

'When will I be able to win the enemies and see that Sita of charming limbs, with large and beautiful eyes like lotus petals, who is like an abundance of fortune?'

'I do not know when I will lift her lotuslike face slightly and drink her beautiful lips like an afflicted man drinks sweet juice.'

'I am eager to cling to her Palmyra fruits like plumpy breasts. Indeed when will I enjoy her embrace?'

'That darkeyed lady (Sita), even though she has me (husband), is in the midst of rakshasas. Surely she is sad and emaciated being away from her husband, without a protector.'

"My beloved is king Janaka's daughter and daughterinlaw of Dasaratha. Yet she is sleeping amid Rakshasas. How is it?"

'When will she come out pushing the Rakshasas like the crescent moon comes out pushing the dark clouds in autumn?'

'Sita who is by nature slim would surely be slender due to abstaining from eating, unfavorable time and location.'

'Indeed by shooting arrows into the chest of rakshasa king, when will I get back Sita and cast off grief from my mind.'

'When will Sita, the chaste woman, who is like the daughter of Gods, cling to my neck, and indeed shed tears of joy?'

'When will I get rid of this terrible grief of separation from Mythili for good, just like discarding a soiled garment?'

'While sagacious Rama was wailing in that way the day came to an end with the sun descending to the west. '

'Remembering the lotus petal eyed Sita, Rama who was distracted with grief, comforted by Lakshmana offered evening prayers.', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्दकाण्डेपञ्चमस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the fifth Sarga of Yuddhakanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Considering the terrifying, dreadful action that was carried by the great soul Hanuman who was like Indra in might, the Lord of Rakshasas felt a bit shy and bending down his head addressed all Rakshasas.'

'"(Hanuman) After all a monkey in size, entered the inaccessible city of Lanka, destroyed it and saw Sita, daughter of king of Janaka."'

'"Hanuman destroyed huge mansions, killed topmost Rakshasas and shattered all the city of Lanka."'

'"What is the best thing to do now? What should we do ultimately? What is advisable to do? What strategy is effective? You may suggest that which is good for us."'

'"O mighty Rakshasas Wise elders say that through wise counsel victory is possible. Therefore, in the case of Rama I am thinking of seeking your advice."'

'"In the world, men are of three kinds  good, mediocre and lowly. It is difficult to know their differences. I will tell you about the flaws in their characteristics."'

'"He who decides, after deliberating with his wellwishers, with capable ministers of good counsel, relatives of common interest or friends before undertaking his task and tries with faith in god is said to be best among men."'

'"He who thinks solitarily (not with others), deliberates with in his mind on his duty and executes his tasks, is said to be a (mediocre) a mediocre one."'

'"He who fails to consider the merits and de merits, decides to do on his own and begins without faith in god saying, \'I\' will do it, is a lowly one among men."'

'"Just as among men there are good, intermediate and lowly people invariably their counsel is also of three kinds  good, mediocre and lowly."'

'"When all ministers are unanimous and come to one conclusion based on sastras, and having come together remain firm, such counsel is said to be the best."'

'"The conclusion in which many ministers have different points of view and attain unanimity in decision after meeting different points of view is a mediocre vision."'

'"Where counsellors with different opinions hold on to their individual opinions that pleases them and are not for the outcome of a unanimous decision, such a counsel is said to be bad."'

'"On account of that, O wise ones Think over very well, rightly of the task to be done and determine the action required by me now."'

'Accompanied by thousands of Vanaras, Rama is approaching to besiege us and reaching the city of Lanka.'

'"Rama who is worthy of his might, accompanied by his brother and army will be able to cross the ocean speedily and easily."'

'Rama may dry up the ocean or do something else out of his power. If Vanaras come and encounter us, we will clash with him. When his army has set out that way, you may advise me of a plan that benefits the army and city of Lanka."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषष्ठमस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'All the Rakshasas of mighty strength, having heard the Lord of Rakshasas, thus spoke to their leader, greeting with folded hands.'

'"O King The ogres are not having political intelligence. They have submitted themselves, even though they are mighty and are having iron bars, javelins, sharp edged spears, and doubleedged swords."'

"The Lord of Rakshasas having spoken like that, to the Rakshasas, who were very strong, but ignorant about the enemy's strength and who were not endowed with political wisdom, spoke to Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, the following words with folded hands."

'"Oh king, (our army is equipped with) iron bars, javelins, double edged swords, spears, three pointed weapons, ploughs etc."'

'"Why are you despondent? You have huge and mighty army strength. When you went to Bhogavathi, the Nagas were subdued in war by your mighty army."'



'"O King Proud of his friendship with Lord Maheshwara (Siva), that mighty ruler of the world Kubera was subdued by you in the conflict."'

'"Causing terrific disturbance to the hordes of Yakshas and taking them as prisoners, you have brought the great aerial chariot from mount Kailas."'

'"Maya, the ruler of Danavas has given his daughter (Mandodari) to you as a wife out of fear of you, O leader of Rakshasas"'

'"Madhu, another ruler of Danavas who was proud of his valour and difficult to approach, the husband of Kumbhinasi was subjugated by you by your offering to fight with him."'

'"O mighty armed king Going to the subterranean world, you won over the serpent demons Vasuki, Takshaka, Shanka and Jati and made them submit to you."'

'"The mighty and strong Danava warriors who had obtained boon were made to fight a war by you for one year."'

'"O king of Rakshasas (Those Danavas) were reduced to sub mission by resorting to your own strength. Oh subduer of enemies, many deceitful tricks were learned from them."'

'"O blessed king Mighty strong sons of Varuna, heroes capable of war and of all the four kinds of army have been won by you."'

'"Oh King Plunging into the ocean, which was in the shape of Yama\'s realm, with an enormous alligator in the form of rod of death, adorned with Salmali trees, turbulent with a huge wave in the form of Death \'s noose, infested with Lord of  Death\'s attendants as serpents, unassailable on account of the mighty Jwara (spirit of fever), you have obtained a great victory over the Lord of Death \'s great army and the army was warded off. By your good battle all the people (of the world) were delighted.'

'"The earth was fully filled with Kshatriya heroes of great prowess, equal to Indra in war who stood like trees on earth."'

'"Raghava is not equal to them in valour, excellence and energy. Those warriors who were difficult to overcome by battle were overpowered and killed by you."'

'"Oh great king, you stay here calmly. Why exert yourself? This strong armed Indrajith alone can destroy those Vanaras."'

'"Oh Great King By performing supreme sacrifices, Indrajith obtained boons from Lord Maheswara, which are very difficult to get."'



'"Liberated by the command of creator Brahma, Indra the destroyer of Sambara and Vrtra entered heaven was adorned and greeted by all Devas."'

'Then a Rakshasa whose body was like a dark cloud, called Prahastha, the heroic chief of the army, spoke these words with folded palms.'

'"Even Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Devils, birds, and serpents, cannot face you in war. What to say of Vanaras?"'

'All of us were inattentive and confident (of our ability) while Hanuman cheated us. When I am alive how will the wanderer of woods (Hanuman) go with life?'

'"I will make all the oceans, mountains, forests or even the entire earth rid of Vanaras if you order me."'

'"O night ranger (Ravana) I will arrange the protection (of this Lanka) from these Vanaras. For your own wrong action (of abducting Sita) you cannot undergo suffering."'

'Feeling very angry, a Rakshasa called Durmukha said, "He who has caused shame for all of us does not deserve to be excused."'

'"Furthermore, this assault by a Vanara on Lanka, to the royal residence, and to the prosperous Lord of Rakshasas is despising."'

'At this very minute I will go alone into the terrific ocean, to the underworld or the upper world and on entering put an end to the monkey.'

'Then a mighty strong one who was endowed with diamond like teeth highly enraged, clasping a dreadful iron bludgeon stained with flesh and blood spoke.'

'"While unassailable Rama is there, along with Lakshmana and Sugriva, what have we to do with miserable, pitiable and helpless Hanuman?"'

'"Now I would go alone and with the iron crowbar, kill Sugriva Lakshmana and Rama and return after shattering the Vanara troops."'

'"O King If you like, listen to my other statement: One who is cunning and is vigilant would win over an enemy."'

'"O Lord of Rakshasas Thousands of fearful Rakshasas capable of assuming any form at free will, heroic ones of frightful appearance should tell Rama the foremost of Raghus, quietly going near him in human form."'

'"\'We have been sent by your younger brother Bharata and he is coming here very soon with the army."'

'"Then from here we will go there wielding tridents, javelins, maces, swords and arrows."'

'Staying in the sky in groups, we will rain astras, sastras and boulders on the Vanara troops and on killing them, we shall send them to the abode of God of death.'

'"When Rama and Lakshmana are distressed that way, they would certainly succumb to our cunning ways and give up life."'

'Thereafter the enraged heroic and valiant son of Kumbhakarna called Nikumbha said to Ravana, who made the world cry.'

'"Let all of you stay here along with the king. Going alone I will kill Rama along with Lakshmana, and Hanuman also Sugriva and all of the Vanaras."'

'Then a Rakshasa called Vajrahanu, mountain like in form, enraged, licking lips with his tongue said these words.'

'All of you giving up fear, do your duties freely move happily sporting and drinking sweet wine. Single handed, I will consume all the Vanara army.'

'"I alone will kill that Rama with Lakshmana, Sugriva, that Angada, Hanuman and the Vanara army."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टमस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"Then Nikumbha, Rshabha, mighty Suryasatru, Supthagna, Yagnaha raksha, Mahaparva, Mahodaro, Durdarsha, Agnikethu, Rasmikethu Rakshasas, Further Ravana's own son powerful Indrajith, Virupaksha and Prahasta, and mighty Rakshasas Vajradamshtra, Dumraaksha and also Durmukha of huge body holding iron bars, tridents, battle axes, bows and sharp arrows, very sharp swords, got up, highly enraged and all Rakshasas glowing like fire addressed Ravana."

"Then Nikumbha, Rshabha, mighty Suryasatru, Supthagna, Yagnaha raksha, Mahaparva, Mahodaro, Durdarsha, Agnikethu, Rasmikethu Rakshasas, Further Ravana's own son powerful Indrajith, Virupaksha and Prahasta, and mighty Rakshasas Vajradamshtra, Dumraaksha and also Durmukha of huge body holding iron bars, tridents, battle axes, bows and sharp arrows, very sharp swords, got up, highly enraged and all Rakshasas glowing like fire addressed Ravana."

'"Right now, we will kill Rama along with Lakshmana, Sugriva and vile Hanuman, on whose account Lanka was attacked."'

'With folded hands, Vibheeshana made all the (Rakshasas) wielding arms to stop and sit and addressed these words to Ravana.'

'"Dear father, intelligent people say that an act which cannot be accomplished by the three means (Sama  Conciliation, Dana  Gift, Bheda  Sowing dissension), should only be accomplished diligently by one\'s heroic deed. Therefore, we should think of war only after the above three means are employed."'

'"O Dear at those who are not alert, who are attacked by the enemy, and who are struck by fate, if you examine diligently according to prescribed method and perform deeds of heroic valour you will succeed."'

'"How do you wish to overpower, him who is very attentive, bent on victory, mighty, steadfast, has subdued anger and unassailable?"'

'"Hanuman has crossed over the ocean, a Lord of streams and rivers and arrived. Who can ever know or think of such a task in this world?"'

'"Enemy\'s strength and valour is inestimable to relate. Do not disregard rashly, O Night ranger"'

'"What offence did Rama do earlier to the Rakshasa king that he abducted the glorious wife of Rama from Janasthana?"'

'"(It is true) Khara was killed by Rama in war as he acted beyond his limit. Certainly, living beings will have to protect their life with their own strength."'

'"On account of this, we have a great fear of Vaidehi. She, who was brought here, is to be given away. What is the use of doing anything, which may be the cause of strife?"'

'"To have enmity with a valorous one, a follower of dharma, is useless and not good for us. Give away Mythili to him (Rama)."'

'"Before Rama comes with elephants and horses and tears with his arrows, this Lanka filled with abundance of gems, give away Mythili."'

'"Lest the highly dreadful, formidable and huge Vanara troops surround all over Lanka. Give away Sita."'

'"If Rama\'s dear wife is not given, this Lanka will be destroyed and also all Rakshasas."'

'"I am requesting you because you are my relation (brother). Do as I said, as I am telling you for your welfare. Give away Sita."'

'"You may restore Rama\'s Mythili, before the emperor Dasaratha\'s son sends forth solid unfailing arrows shining like autumnal Sun provided with fresh heads and shafts for killing you."'

'"Give up that happiness and anger which destroys virtues. Seek pleasures that enhance fame. Be pacified. Live happily with sons and relatives restoring Mythili to Rama, the son of Dasaratha."'

'Having heard everything that was told by Vibheeshana, the Lord of Rakshasas sent away all and entered his palace.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेनवमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Thereafter, determined to relate about righteous and material gains, Vibheeshana of fierce tasks got up early in the morning when the Sun rose and set himself to go to the residence of Lord of Rakshasas.'

"Like a lofty mountain top, and like a summit of a mountain, Ravana's palace was a supreme one, divided into many spacious sections and surrounded by many people."

'The palace was inhabited by wise ones, and devoted to their Lord and ministers,commanded by trustworthy and competent Rakshasas spread everywhere and well protected.'

'It was filled with elephants in rut breathing heavily, which was like a tempestuous wind around, that echoed by the blowing of conchs of the early morning and filled with the sounds of drums and trumpets.'

'(It was) The royal path was filled with women, with prattling sounds of gossiping. It had shining golden passages and decorated with the best of ornaments.'

'(It was) like the abode of Gandharvas (the celestial musicians), like an abode of wind god, abounding in collection of precious gems, like the mansion of Nagas indulging  in enjoyment.'

"Heroic (Vibheeshana) of exceptional splendour, whose brilliance spread widely like the radiance of the highly lustrous Sun entered his brother's abode."

'Highly effulgent (Vibheeshana) heard sounds of recitation of sacred mantras from Vedas uttered by learned ones desiring a propitious day for his brother.'

'Mighty Vibheeshana saw there, brahmins learned in vedas and mantras, who worshipped with yellow rice, curd, clarified butter and flowers.'

'Vibheeshana, of broad shoulders, who is revered by Rakshasas was shining in his own splendour. He greeted with folded palms, the brother of Kubera (Ravana) seated on his chair.'

'Vibheeshana who was learned in traditions and wellversed with code of conduct reached a seat decorated with gold blessed by the glance of the king Ravana.'

'When none other than ministers were present, Vibheeshana spoke these meaningful words to the distinguished Ravana, decidedly wishing for welfare.'

'Vibheeshana who knew the good and bad of the world and knew to advice in consonance with place and time said to his elder brother in an appeasing manner, propitiating him observing the customary tradition.'

'"Since Vaidehi has come to this city, inauspicious happenings are seen by us."'

'"Even from the fire of fire sacrifices, fire particles polluted with smoke are rising and the fire is not burning with brilliance."'

'"In the cooking fire, in places of fire sacrifice, so also at places where offerings are made into fire, serpents are seen. Ants are seen in the Havis."'

'"The udder of cows is dried up, the proud elephants have lost their ichor, the horses are pathetic and neighing. They are not even interested in fodder."'

'"O King the donkeys and camels have shed their body hair and are crying. Even though they are treated for it in different ways they are not getting to be in normal natural form."'

'Wild crows are seen in flocks all over the top of aerial chariot sounding harsh gathered in groups.'

'"Even the eagles are collecting together and standing over the houses of the capital repeatedly in both the auspicious times of morning and evening and making inauspicious sounds."'

'At the entrance of the capital are heard thunderous sounds of carnivorous animals collected together sounding like thunder.'

'"Therefore, the task (of burning Lanka) has commenced. I have thought of this appropriate atonement. Restore Vaidehi to Rama."'

'"O great king You may know that I am not telling like this out of my delusion or greed. You ought not to find fault with me."'

'All of us, the Rakshasas and Rakshasa women of the capital, even those in the harem, and all the common people are aware of this offence.'

'All your ministers have abstained from telling you out of fear of you. I must necessarily tell you (as brother) this which is seen and heard. You may determine that which is justifiable by determining the propriety. It is proper for me to submit to you.'

'Foregoing the beneficial, meaningful, and gentle words of counsel of significance in the past, present and future also (given by Vibheeshana), Ravana seized with anger replied in this manner.'

'"I do not perceive fear from anyone. Rama will not be able to get Mythili at any time. How can the elder brother of Lakshmana withstand me even if Indra and Devatas come (to his help) in battle"'

"Then mighty tenheaded Ravana of formidable valour, a destroyer of Devatas' army in war, sent away Vibheeshana who had spoken words of good advice in that manner.", '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेवामलीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेदशमस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the tenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Infatuated with passion towards Mythili, disregarded by his dear ones on account of sinful actions, sinner Ravana became weak.'

'Because of the lapse of time, Ravana considered it imminent to consult with his ministers and friends about war.'

'Ravana, having reached, ascended the magnificent chariot that was overlaid with golden latticework, decked with gems and corals, and yoked to trained horses.'

'The tenheaded Ravana, eminent one among Rakshasas climbed up that best of chariots that was making noise like the roaring sound of a huge cloud and went to assembly.'

'Then soldiers wielding swords and different kinds of weapons stood in front of the Lord of Rakshasas.'

'Further (Rakshasas) adorned in different kinds of uncouth attire, wearing different kinds of ornaments went by his side and also at the back.'

'(Some Rakshasa) Charioteers riding on chariots, some on proud elephants and some on horses sporting away followed the tenheaded Ravana.'

'Some holding maces and iron bars, some holding strong iron clubs in hand, and some others holding battle axes, tridents and other weapons went.'

'Then as Ravana entered the assembly thousands of band instruments sounded aloud. Conchs broke forth producing tumultuous noise.'

'As the rattling sounds of the great chariot echoed in all directions, he entered the bright pleasing royal path all at once.'

'The pure white canopy of Ravana held by the Rakshasas spread like lines shone like the Lord of stars (the full moon).'

'A pair of fans with pure crystal like handles with a golden bouquet in the middle glowed.'

'Standing on the ground, all the Rakshasas bowing their heads down and with folded palms offered their salutations to the foremost of the Rakshasas seated in the chariot.'

'Then as the conqueror of foes, an exceptionally splendid one, Ravana was praised by the Rakshasas saying, "Victory to you, Prosperity to you", Ravana entered the wellbuilt royal court.'

'Exceptionally splendid one, (Ravana) embodied with glowing body entered the royal court constructed by Vishwakarma, with pillars of gold and silver. Inside of the court was pure like crystal and carpeted with shining golden silk. It was very beautiful and ever shining and guarded by six hundred devils.'

'Ravana sat on a huge excellent seat encrusted with Vydurya gems and covered with deer skin and which had a pillow.'

'Then that Lord like Ravana said "We have to do a great task against the enemies now. It has to be performed." He commanded quick footed messengers to get the Rakshasas to him at once.'

'Those Rakshasas having heard the words spoken by Ravana went to places of recreation, bedrooms and gardens and went round without fear into every house directing the Rakshasas.'

'Of those (Rakshasas) some went on exquisite chariots, some on proud sturdy horses some ascended elephants and some by foot.'

'With chariots, elephants and horses advancing in groups the prosperous capital was shining resembling the flocks of birds in the sky.'

'Parking those vehicles of several kinds at the entrance they entered the royal court by foot like the lions entering the cave of a mountain.'

'They held the feet of the king and on offering salutations to the king took their seat. While some took golden seats, some sat on a kusa grass mat, and some took a se at on the floor.'

"Those Rakshasas (who arrived) at the royal court settled down in appropriate seats on the king's command. The leaders of Rakshasas s at close by Ravana."

'Those who were learned in decision making, ministers, virtuous and knowledgeable ones, those who can visualise things with their intellect, army men, like wise many heroes and important people collected at the royal assembly shining in golden colour to deliberate on matters for a happy conclusion.'

'Thereafter illustrious and great Vibheeshana having ascended auspicious and choicest chariot decked with gold and yoked to good horses went to the assembly of his elder brother.'

"There after Vibheeshana the younger brother, repeated his name (by way of courtesy ). A fter that he offered salutations to his elder brother's feet. B oth Sukha and Prahastha likewise followed Vibheeshana and took their seats offered according to their position."

'In that royal court decorated with different kinds of golden and gem colours, the Rakshasas attired in beautiful clothes with their body smeared with fragrance of incense and sandal paste and wearing floral garland s whose fragrance had spread all over.'

"Those who assembled at the royal court neither made a little noise, nor uttered untruth, nor spoke. All of them were fully accomplished, very heroic and looked at their Lord's face."

'In that assembly, amid those heroes of great prowess, who held arms, Ravana glowed like Indra, who wields a diamond bolt in battle among the Vasus.', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकादशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the eleventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Then Ravana who is victorious in wars, looking at the vast assembly (of Rakshasas) ordered Prahastha, the chief of the army.'

'"O Chief of the army You order those who are well versed in the knowledge of all kinds of war and entrust those warriors of four divisions of the army to safeguard the city. Likewise, you ought to order them to be more alert."'

"Celebrated Prahastha desiring to carry out the king's order assigned the army inside and outside the city."

'There after Prahastha, having assigned the army for guarding the city, sat down in front of the king, and appealed.'

'"You are a powerful one. Your army has been posted outside as well as inside. You may tell me at once without any distraction what you intend to do."'

"Ravana who was keen on doing good to the kingdom desiring happiness and having heard Prahastha's word, said this in the midst of his dear ones."

'"When there is doubt about dharma, artha and kama, you are capable of deciphering between desirable and undesirable, happiness and sorrow, gain and loss."'

'"The actions carried out by me are always after it is well thought out and decided by all of you. I know that those actions have not failed."'

'"Just as Indra who rules over the moon, sun, stars, and gods attains fortune, accompanied by you I will attain fortune exceedingly at once."'

'"Indeed, rightly I told all of you earlier. Since Kumbhakarna was sleeping I had not informed him about this matter."'

'"Kumbhakarna, the foremost among the wielders of weapons, is very strong. He was sleeping these six months and has arrived now."'

'"This Sita, the consort of Rama was brought from D and akaranya, a place where rakshasas wander."'

'"Sita who walks modestly did not like to enter into my bed (love me ) however much I prayed. I do not think there is anyone who looks like her in the three worlds."'

'"She is a woman of slender waist, plump hips, whose face is like an autumnal full moon. She is gentle and like a golden image. She is like a magical one constructed by Maya."'

'"Beholding her smooth red soles and evenly shaped pinkish nails of feet, love is kindled in me."'

'"On beholding the sacrificial firelike face of Sita glowing like the radiance of the Sun, seeing her prominent nose, her large attractive countenance with beautiful eyes surely, I am overtaken by love and have become a slave to her."'

'"I have been disturbed by passion, which is equal in anger or happiness and makes one pale in grief or agony."'

'"Broadeyed Sita requested me one year time expecting her husband Rama to come (this is a false statement made by Ravana here) and I promised in turn to Sita of beautiful eyes. Just like an exhausted horse that marched I am tired on account of my passion."'

'"How will the Vanaras and even both the sons of Dasaratha be able to cross the unassailable ocean inhabited by huge crocodiles?"'

'"Even so, a huge destruction was done to us, by a single monkey. The consequences of their acts are unpredictable. Tell me what is there in your mind, according to your own understanding."'

'"There is no fear of human beings for me. I won the war between Devas and asuras along with you. As it is, all of you are there. There at the shore of the ocean Rama and Lakshmana have collected with Sugriva and other leaders placing Vanaras in front to get back Sita. You may suggest a way out to gain."'

'"You may also think over and suggest to me a plan to kill Rama and Lakshmana without giving Sita."'

'"No one can cross the ocean with Vanaras (help). As such I do not find anyone has the capacity. I am certain of victory."'

'On hearing the lamentation of Ravana seized with passion, enraged Kumbhakarna uttered these words.'

'"If you had at that time, that is before bringing Sita by force, which was accompanied by Rama and Lakshmana, discussed, and thought of, then you would be sure in your mind like the Yamuna River filling the Yamuna (mountain )."'

'"Great king If you had discussed with us about all this action earlier, it would have been very good."'

'"O Ravana Whoever is the king, having a sense of determination, thinks justifiably and carries out princely duties will not regret."'

'"Tasks carried out without proper plan and contrary to the right principles are spoilt like inauspicious oblations offered into sacrificial fire."'

'"He who seeks to perform earlier what has to be done later and does later what have to be done earlier is not a knower of right and wrong."'

'A hasty one who acts without thinking of the superior strength (of enemy) gets out at once like the swan penetrates into the crevice of Krauncha (mountain).'

'"Without prior thought this great act has been done by you. Rama has not killed you, fortunately like poison mixed flesh would kill."'

'"O Sinless Ravana Therefore, that which you have done is not possible for none other than me. I will kill your enemy and accomplish your goal for you."'

'"O Rakshasa I will ruin the enemy. I will fight with both of them (Rama and Lakshmana) even if they are Indra and sun, fire god and wind god or Kubera and Varuna."'

'"If I go with a mountain like body and sharp teeth, holding a huge iron bar roaring like a lion, even Indra will run away out of fear."'

'"By the time he releases a second arrow again, I will immediately drink his blood. Stay quiet with confidence."'

'"By killing Rama, I will try to make you happy and victorious. On killing Rama and Lakshmana like that I will consume the Vanara leaders."'

'"You be free from fear, sporting and drinking the best of wines and doing actions that you like. Rama will be sent to the abode of the god of death. On reaching their Sita will be under your control for long."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वादशस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of twelfth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Having realized that Ravana has become angry, Mahaparsva of extraordinary strength, thinking of pleasing him for a while greeting him with folded palms, spoke.'

'"Having reached a forest inhabited by wild animals and snakes for honey, whoever does not drink the honey obtained is surely a childish one."'

'"O Destroyer of foes Who is there to question Lord since you are Lord? Setting your foot on the head of enemy you may sport with Sita."'

'"(O Ravana) of great strength Take hold of Sita forcibly like the cock, enjoy and revel with her."'

'"When you have fulfilled your desire, why fear? Let it happen. Let that which is yet to come, happen. You will be able to face."'

'"Kumbhakarna accompanied by Indrajith of extraordinary strength have the power to ward off even if Indra, armed with thunderbolt comes."'

'"Leaving aside charity, conciliation or even by showing dissension, the three means resorted to by the wise people, you will attain success by force."'

'"O Ravana of extraordinary strength We will bring all your enemies under control on their arrival here. There is no doubt."'

'Ravana, the king of Rakshasas feeling happy about the statement of Mahaparsva, spoke these words.'

'"O Mahaparsva I have certain secret that happened in the past. It was a long time ago and I shall tell you. Listen to it."'

'"While I was going in the sky to the abode of Grandfather Brahma, I saw a celebrated one called Punjikasthala flying concealing herself, glowing like the flame of the fire."'

'"Then her clothes were stripped off by me forcibly and enjoyed her. Then like a violently shaken lotus stem, she went to the abode of Brahma."'

'"Then the high souled Brahma happened to know about that incident, I believe. Enraged Brahma made this statement to me."'

'"From today onwards if you desire to resort to a woman forcefully, your head will break into a hundred pieces. There is no doubt."'

'"Thus, frightened on account of his curse, I do not perforce to get her to my lustrous bed."'

'"My speed is like that of the ocean, my movement is like that of the wind and Dasaratha\'s son does not know this. Therefore, he is coming to attack me."'

'"He is waking me up like waking up a lion sleeping in the mountain cave. Like waking up death from sleep, he is desiring to instigate me. What sort of a person is he?"'

'"Rama has not seen my sharp arrows in comb at that are like the forked flame like the tongues of snakes. So, he is coming towards me."'

'At once with thunderbolts and meteor like arrows released from my bow will blaze up Rama just like fire sticks whirled at elephants.'

'"Surrounded by a huge army I will split up his army like the morning Sun splits up stars with his radiance."'

'"Even for the thousand eyed Indra or Lord Varuna it is not possible to withstand me in combat. In the past I have won this city ruled by Kubera with huge strength."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोदशस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the thirteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'On hearing the statement of the Lord of Rakshasas and roaring of Kumbhakarna, looking at Ravana the king of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana said these good words appropriate of a noble person.'

'"O king Why have you desired Sita who has snake hood at her bosom, has poison of grief, has sharp fangs behind her gentle smile and has five fingers of her palm as five heads of snake called Sita?"'

'"Before the monkeys of mountain like form whose teeth and claws are like weapons reach Lanka, give away Mythili to Rama."'

'"Give away Mythili to Rama before he releases arrows like that of thunder bolt with the speed of wind and take away the heads of the leader."'

'"O King It will not be possible for either Kumbhakarna or Indrajith so also for Mahaparsva not even Mahodara, so also for Nikumbha or Kumbha and Athikaya to face Rama in combat."'

'"Rama\'s arrows will not leave you with life even if you are guarded by Sun or wind god, not even if you sit on the lap of Indra or death god or even if you enter the sky or under water."'

'After hearing the words said by Vibheeshana, Prahastha spoke these words, we do not know the fear of gods or Rakshasas or anyone.'

'"We are not afraid of Yakshas, Gandharvas, or even Nagas. We have no fear of birds or reptiles. What fear can we have of the king\'s son, Rama?"'

"Then Vibheeshana, wishing the welfare of the king, intent upon Dharma, artha and kama, thinking rightly and deeply, spoke these words on hearing Prahastha's words that were not good."

'"That which you intend to accomplish against Rama is not possible either for you or the king and even for Kumbhakarna and Mahodara, just as heaven is not obtained by the unrighteous people," said Vibheeshana.'

'"Prahastha How can you or me or all Rakshasas kill Rama who is knowledgeable of everything, just as one who is not swimming can cross the great ocean."'

'"One to whom righteousness is foremost, who is capable of fighting with eleven thousand warriors as charioteer, (like Dasaratha) who is a glorious scion of Ikshvaku dynasty, who is highly capable in war, in front of whom even gods got bewildered earlier. What can be done by you?"'

'"Prahastha Sharp arrows of Rama fixed with feathers of Kanka birds are dangerous arrows. They will tear your body and penetrate. What are you boasting yourself?"'

'"Prahastha Before the lifethreatening sharp arrows which have the speed of a meteor released by Rama penetrate and tear your body, why are you boasting yourself?"'

'"Either Ravana or exceptionally strong Trisirsha, or even Nikumbha son of Kumbahakarna, or Indrajith are not capable of opposing Rama who is equal to Indra in war. How can you?"'

'"Either by Devanthaka or Naranthaka, in the same way the great soul Athiratha or Akampana, who is of mountainlike size, will not be able to stand against Raghava in war."'

'"This king who is by nature violent and acts without thinking about being an addict to seven vices, is destroying Rakshasas. You are also attending to him calling yourself as friends but like enemies."'

'"This king is entwined by a fearsome and extremely strong thousand hooded snake endowed with extraordinary energy at present. Lift him up and relieve him."'

'"The king will have to be protected by all friends joined together whose wishes have been gratified even by catching him by his hair forcibly just as a man surrounded by a devil of terrific strength is pulled out by his hair."'

'"He is going to fall into the ocean called Rama to be destroyed, engulfed in the pit of the shape of Kakutstha Rama, the underworld. It is proper for all of us to join and make him free."'

'"I tell these good words embodying my opinion. Let the king\'s wife be given away for the good of the Rakshasas, their dear ones, for the capital and the king."'

'"One who is a minister should advice after ascertaining the strength of the foe and his own strength so also one\'s own growth (in strength) and fall in strength (of foe) and advice that which is conducive to the king\'s welfare."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुर्दसस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the fourteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Thus spoke Indrajith, the great leader of the Rakshasa army, having heard the words spoken by the highly intelligent Vibheeshana who was equal to Brhaspathi in wisdom.'

'"What a meaningless statement you made uncle, being frightened? One who is not born in our race also would not have said such unbecoming words uttered by you (nor do such unbecoming acts)?"'

'"In this race, alone younger father Vibheeshana is devoid of strength, valour, prowess, heroism, courage and boldness."'

'"Those two sons of the king of men could be killed in war by an ordinary Rakshasa among us single handed. O timid one Why are you scaring us?"'

'"I have cast down on the ground, Indra, the Lord of gods and of three worlds. At one time all the gods in groups fled in all directions scared of me."'

'"I pushed down the elephant Airavata coming towards me making noise, pulled down its tusks forcibly and chased the entire group of gods."'

'"I am such a valiant one who crushed the arrogance of even the king of gods, Devendra. I can put even the Rakshasa leaders to grief. How is it not possible for me to do away the sons of kings who are ordinary human beings."'

'Vibheeshana, the best among wielders of weapons, spoke the following words of highly beneficial advice after hearing the words of dangerous Indrajith, the foremost of the warriors.'

'"O dear  You have no capacity for decision making. You are young and not mature. Therefore, you are talking incoherently without any sense which is selfdestructive."'

'"Indrajith Though you are calling yourself as the son of Ravana and pretending to be a friend, you are his foe. Even after hearing about the kind of destruction (of Ravana, his kingdom etc.) from Rama, out of delusion you are accepting (with Ravana)."'

'"You who are evil minded, deserve to be killed. The one who brought you here is young and loves you to make bold attempts. He is polluting your mind and deserves to be killed."'

'"Indrajith You are foolish and boasting yourself. You lack obedience. You are wicked by nature, cruel, poor in intellect, extremely evil minded, ignorant and have spoken like a child."'

'"Who can bear the arrows released by Rama in combat, which resembles the shaft of Brahma in splendour and flames of fire resembling death and equal to the shaft of the Lord of death?"'

'"O King We will offer celebrated Sita to Rama along with wealth, gems, good ornaments, wonderful and beautiful clothes and precious gems and remain here devoid of sorrow."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चदशस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the fifteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic of the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"While Vibheeshana advised in Ravana's favour with all good intention, Ravana who was under the influence of death spoke harsh words."

'"One can live with a known enemy or even with an angry and venomous serpent but cannot stay together with one who professes to be a friend and devoted to an enemy."'

'"The behaviour of close relatives in all worlds is known to me. They are happy at the difficulties of relatives."'

'"O Rakshasa Relatives will insult and disapprove their chief even if he is an accomplished one, a virtuous one or a heroic one and does his duty (as a ruler)."'

'"Pretending to be friendly forever the relatives rejoice in them is fortunes of their relatives. They create terrible fear like desperadoes and covertly ones."'

'"In the past elephants in the lotus park, uttered some verses on seeing men holding snares in hand. I will relate those that I heard. You may listen."'

'"We have no fear of fire or weapons or noose of death. Selfish relatives are causing fear in us."'

'"It is known that they (paternal relatives) teach the means to catch us. Out of all fears the fear of close relatives is the great difficulty for us."'

'"In the cows\' wealth is present, in the brahmins forbearance is seen, in the women capriciousness exists but in close relatives fear is present."'

'"Gentle (Vibheeshana) one Since you belong to the same kinsfolk (as I) you do not like me, who is born of noble descent, attained the position of chief (of clan), is worshipped by the world, and attained sovereignty."'

'"Just as drops of water that fall on lotus leaves do not adhere to each other, like wise however long you spend with an unworthy (relative) one, good friendship does not take place."'

'"Just as honeybees do not have gratitude after drinking (honey) and satisfying, the friendship with an unworthy person like you is of no use."'

'"Just as an elephant takes dust with its trunk and abuses (and spreads on) its own body after taking a bath so also is the association with unworthy ones."'

'"Just as the autumn rain poured out from the thundering clouds does not dampen, in the same way unworthy ones do not have affection."'

'"Just as honeybees do not stay at the flower after satisfaction with the nectar, in the same way is the friendship with unworthy ones."'

'"O Night ranger (Vibheeshana) If any other one had spoken such words, I would not let him live this moment and also destroy. Fie upon you."'

'Great Vibheeshana was enraged. Then going up into the sky spoke these words to his brother, the Lord of Rakshasas.'

'"O King You, being my elder brother, you may tell me What you wish. You are equal to father being elder brother and are to be honoured. But you have not followed the righteous path. The words you spoke are not pardonable."'

'"O Tenheaded king Fallen under the sway of death, you are foolish. You do not understand the well prepared good words spoken by me wishing your welfare."'

'"O King Those who speak pleasingly are always easier to find than those who speak unpleasant but good words. Listeners of unpleasant words (though good) are difficult (to find)."'

'"Bound by the noose of death which is the cause of destruction of all beings you are going to be killed just as the burning house if you ignore my advice."'

'"While the sharp golden arrows of Rama burning like fire strike you, I do not wish to see."'

'"Even the heroic archers and mighty men wielding weapons will fall in war seized by death like the dams of sands."'

'"Since you are an elderly one, I desired to tender good advice and spoke these words. I may be excused. You protect all these Rakshasas, this capital city and yourself after I depart. Let you be auspicious and be happy."'

'"O King My words (of advice), given in your interest to prevent you, are not palatable to you. Good advice tendered by friends at the time of death will not be received by those beings whose life is over."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषोडशस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the sixteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Vibheeshana, having addressed Ravana in harsh language, reached Rama and Lakshmana in a short while.'

'All the Vanaras on the ground saw Vibheeshana who was like Mount Meru in form and shining like a brilliant lightning.'

'His four companions of terrific prowess were also there with him. They were wearing all weapons and were adorned with excellent ornaments.'

'Vibheeshana looked like a mass of cloud, like someone who can cause thunderbolt, possessing excellent weapons and wonderful jewels.'

'Wise Sugriva the Lord of the Vanara army, a formidable one along with Vanaras, started thinking on seeing Vibheeshana (the fifth one) besides four others.'

'Reflecting for a while he addressed Hanuman and the other Vanara leaders in this way.'

'Armed with all kinds of weapons this Rakshasa along with four Rakshasas are coming near to attack. You may see. There is no doubt.'

"Having heard Sugriva's words, all the Vanara leaders taking up Sala trees and boulders uttered these words."

'"O King Order us to kill these evil minded ones at once. Being mortals and of short life, on striking, all of them will fall down dead on the ground."'

'As they (Vanaras) started conversing, Vibheeshana, having reached the northern shore, stayed in the sky.'

'Great and very wise Vibheeshana, gazing at Sugriva and the Vanaras, addressed them in a loud tone.'

'"I am called Vibheeshana, the younger brother of Ravana, the king of Rakshasas and of evil conduct."'

'"Having been carried away from Janasthana by him (Ravana) poor and pitiable Sita is detained and protected by the Rakshasas."'

'"I argued with him again and again in several ways to explain him and admonished him saying \'restore Sita to Rama\'."'

'"Impelled by death Ravana would not take good words of advice tendered to him just as one who is impelled by death does not take medicine."'

'"Leaving my sons and wife, I have come for protection of Raghava having been put to shame by him (Ravana), spoken to harshly and treated like a slave."'

'At once you may inform Raghava who is a protector of the whole world that I, Vibheeshana, are waiting here.'

'Highly valiant Sugriva having heard all this (from Vibheeshana) eagerly spoke these words to Rama in the presence of Lakshmana.'

'"Ravana\'s younger brother, known as Vibheeshana, along with four Rakshasas has come to you seeking protection."'

'"O Scorcher of enemies For Vanara\'s safety and considering to be spies also you should be alert in your deliberations, with a plan and policy in moving together and deciding what is to be done. Let you be safe."'

'"Know that these Rakshasas are heroic, crafty and cannot be trusted. They can change their form at will and can move about without being seen."'

'"This Rakshasa may be a spy who has found entry into our camp to create differences (among us). No doubt about it."'

'"Or else if he is a wise one and knows our weak points, might have found a way and reached us. He may strike us if he is trusted."'

'Army of friends or army from a jungle, so also an army brought up by a king for generations, army obtained on payment and all kinds of army except for enemies can be accepted.'

'"O king, by nature they are Rakshasas, and he is brother of the enemy. Evidently, he has arrived by himself. How to trust him?"'

'"O Rama of most forbearing nature Vibheeshana is sent by Ravana. You may consider that he is fit to be arrested, I think."'

'"O Raghava You may know that this Rakshasa is being sent here by deceit ever intending to strike you under the cover of creating confidence."'

'"One who entered the enemy\'s camp and had access to come inside kills the enemies. It is like an owl killing many crows having entered the hole."'

'"Let us kill this Vibheeshana by punishment along with his ministers as he is the brother of cruel Ravana (said Sugriva to Rama)."'

'The chief of the army (Sugriva) who knew how to speak appropriately having submitted in that manner to Rama who was adept in expression remained silent.'

'Rama of great fame having heard the words of Sugriva, addressed the Vanara army including the great Hanuman who stood close by.'

'"The highly reasonable words of advice given by the king of Vanaras about Ravana\'s brother was heard even by you."'

'"It is always desirable to seek everlasting advice for one\'s welfare from capable and wise ones by the near and dear ones. It is proper to seek advice on complex matters by one who is in a difficult situation."'

'The Vanaras having heard the words spoken by Rama in that way, tendered beneficial advice and their own opinion respectfully, to be vigilant.'

'"O Raghava there is nothing unknown to you in the three worlds. You are asking our opinion (giving us the honour) out of friendship."'

'"You are a truthful follower of vows, a heroic and righteous one. You are firm in your resolve, capable of good judgment, have a good memory of the past traditions and committed in heart to your friends."'

'"On account of that reason, since your ministers are richly endowed with intelligence let them speak out again and again, one after the other in that way."'

'Having said so, Angada the intelligent Vanara spoke these words immediately to Rama for judging Vibheeshana.'

'"Since he has come from the enemy\'s camp suddenly, surely Vibheeshana is to be suspected in every way. He is not worthy to be trusted."'

'"One who has a perfidious mind keeps moving about concealing his intention and will attack at weak points, which will be a great inestimable mistake."'

'Ascertaining advantages and disadvantages one should take the right course of action, by acting if it is virtuous and giving up if it is faulty.'

'"If there are great bad qualities (in Vibheeshana) no doubt he has to be rejected. If there are many virtues let us take him knowing them also."'

'"Sarabha has also decided and spoken these meaningful words of advice." O Tiger among men Let a spy be assigned to cover him at once."'

'"By employing a spy with subtle intellect to examine Vibheeshana, we can act in an appropriate manner to accept him (Vibheeshana)."'

'Then, enlightened Jambavan who was endowed with sense of discrimination, considering all facts made his submission which was free from flaws.'

'"Vibheeshana who has conceived bitter hatred towards the sinful Rakshasa king Ravana came without regard for place and time is always to be viewed with suspicion."'

'"Mainda, who was prudent in making policy and rich in expression, considering all facts expressed this statement that was fully logical."'

'"O king of mortals This is Ravana\'s brother called Vibheeshana. Let him be slowly and gently interrogated for long."'

'"O Best of kings After truly ascertaining Vibheeshana\'s intention whether he is wicked or not, you may act wisely (said Mainda)."'

'On the other hand, Hanuman who was endowed with rich culture spoke these soft, sweet, and meaningful words briefly.'

'"Even for Brihaspati who is proclaimed to be highly intelligent, it is not possible to surpass you as you are the foremost in capability and eloquence."'

'"O King Rama I am telling this to you truly not for the sake of argument, not for the sake of creating friction, or with a sense of superiority, or desire but out of respect."'

'"Your counsellors have said that after judging good or bad qualities we should accept or reject Vibheeshana. I see a flaw in that statement as such action would not arise."'

'"When entrusted with duty one\'s capability will be known. It is not possible to appoint him for duty inconsiderately without understanding (his capacity) as it will be faulty."'

'"Your counsellors (Sarabha) have said that it is proper to know from the spies to ascertain about him. It has no meaning as it is not possible to do so (as he is near you). It does not serve the purpose."'

'"This Vibheeshana has come here without regard for place and time. I desire to speak what I feel in this regard."'

'"It seems proper for him (Vibheeshana) to come here, considering place and time and so also considering that you are superior to him (Ravana) even if there are demerits in him and merits in you."'

'"He has thought over and seen wickedness in Ravana, likewise valiance in you has made you come here. He seems to be right and suitable."'

'"O king People of unknown identity should enquire about him. (Vibheeshana)" said Mainda. Having reviewed the matter, I have another view. (in the matter)."'

'"If enquired suddenly, a wise one will also become suspicious of his words. Even a friend who has come there will seem like a wicked one to him."'

'"O king It is not possible to know the intention (of an enemy) of others at once without excessive dexterity. It is to be known by his tone of words and description."'

'"Even when one is speaking, his malevolence is known. It does not seem so as his countenance is also pleasing. Therefore, I have no doubt (of him)."'

'"One who is with deceitful feeling will not come without an expression of suspicion. He has come on his own and even his talk and looks are not suspicious to me."'

'"Even if one intends to hide in his external form, it is not feasible to keep it concealed. The inner feeling of a man gets revealed even if cleverly hidden."'

'Having heard Hanuman (son of wind god) formidable Rama was highly pleased at heart and started to tell his opinion.'

'"Even I desire to speak a few words about Vibheeshana. I wish you, who are my well wishers and devoted to me, also hear me."'

'Although he (Vibheeshana) has defects, as he has come here with a friendly feeling, I cannot reject him. Good people are not reprehensible.'

'Then Sugriva, the leader of Vanaras reflecting on what was spoken by Rama said these words favouring Rama.'

'"Let this Rakshasa (night ranger) be a wicked one or not a wicked one, what have we to worry about such a person? He has come here abandoned by his brother and who will not send away such a person? Who will not do so?"'

'On hearing the words of the king of Vanaras, Rama of Kakuthsa dynasty and of truthful valour looked at all and threw a smile slightly at meritorious Lakshmana and spoke these words.'

'"That which has been spoken by the Lord of monkeys in this way is not possible for one who has not studied sastras or served the elders."'

'"It strikes me that in this regard, as it is openly known for all the kings or at least in a subtle manner from a worldly point of view."'

'"When in difficulty kings of the same clan of adjoining countries keep attacking the renowned and so they are declared as enemies. It is on account of this cause he (Vibheeshana) has come here."'

'"The sinless ones respect the kings of their clan as friendly ones. But by and large such kings also do not believe the virtuous ones among the kings."'

'"I will tell you what the scriptures have said about the demerit in accepting an enemy\'s strength that you have spoken. You may listen."'

'"We do not belong to their clan. Among Rakshasas there are some learned ones. Vibheeshana has come because of his desire for their (Rakshasa) kingdom, perhaps ?"'

'"Kinsmen will not be satisfied with one another and are not free from anxiety. That way they will not be together. Vibheeshana who has come out of fear in this way crying loudly for help and is worthy to accept."'

'"O dear All brothers cannot be like Bharata, all sons will not be like me, or all friends like you."'

'When Rama had spoken that way, sagacious Sugriva along with Lakshmana got up and saluted him and spoke these words to Rama.'

'"Rama, you are exceptional in excusing Vibheeshana. Realize that he has been dispatched here by Ravana. I consider befitting for you to captivate him."'

'"O sinless mightyarmed Rama I believe that this Rakshasa has been sent to come here covertly to strike at you or me or Lakshmana. On knowing that you are here the cruel Ravana\'s brother has come greedily along with his counsellors to kill you."', 'Sugriva the chief of the army, who was good at speech and adept in expression, having said to Rama, the best among the Raghu race, remained silent thereafter.'

'Having heard the words of the leader of Vanaras that were nobler, Rama spoke these auspicious words.'

'"Whether this night ranger is wicked or not wicked, is he capable of doing even subtlest harm to me?"'

'"O leader of the Vanara troop If I so desire, I can kill with the tip of my big finger the devils, Danavas, Yakshas and the Rakshasas on this earth."'

'"You have heard of the (story of a) dove that offered his own flesh to an enemy who came to seek protection according to tradition (of hospitality)."'

'"O Supreme Vanara When the fowler who had carried away the mate came near the dove it received him and in turn protected him. What more can a man like me do?"'

'"In the past Kanva\'s son called Kandu, a sage and a truthful one used to sing verses inculcating righteousness. (I shall recite) You may listen."'

'"O scorcher of enemies To one who greets reverentially with folded hands and begs for protection, we should not be cruel, and he is not to be killed."'

"An enemy who comes for protection against another enemy should be protected, even giving up one's own life whoever he may be, even if he is afflicted or arrogant."

'"If one does not protect, or give refuge, according to his capacity out of fear, desire (to gain) or delusion, the sin acquired by him will be censured by the world."'

'"One who fails to protect a refugee who seeks protection from him is ruined in the eyes of the refugee and he takes away all the merit."'

'"One who resorts to failure in protecting a refugee, will be doing a great sin that way and will be shut out of heaven, be infamy and his strength and virility will be lost."'

'"Excellent and meaningful words have been said by sage Kandu (about one who protects a refugee), that is by doing one\'s righteous duty. He will be not only famous but reach heaven as a result of his action."'

'"I will provide protection from all living beings for the one who seeks protection from me and begs in this way. This is my vow."'

'"O best of Vanaras Sugriva Either Vibheeshana or any one by himself and even Ravana who is unprotected thus seeks security from me, I will offer protection."'

'Having heard the inciting words spoken by Rama so lovingly, the king of Vanaras replied.'

'"What wonderful words have been spoken by you, Rama? You are the knower of righteous duty, protector of the world, a virtuous and upright one."'

'"My inner self is aware that this Vibheeshana is pure. He has been tested in all respects with doubtful feelings."'

'"Rama therefore, let this highly sagacious Vibheeshana be with you like a friend in equal terms and enjoy."'

"Perceiving Sugriva's befitting words, king Rama went to meet Vibheeshana like Indra arranged to meet with the king of birds.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टादशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the eighteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'When wise Vibheeshana, the brother of Ravana was assured of security by Raghava, he looked around the ground and prepared (to descend).'

'Righteous Vibheeshana descended from the sky and fell at the feet of Rama accompanied by his devotees happily (considering it to be inappropriate to come with foot down he came straight down with his body).'

'Thereafter Vibheeshana and the four Rakshasas who sought shelter prostrated lying at the feet of Rama expressing their duty, duly and placing confidence in Rama who spoke these words showing extreme joy.'

'"I am Ravana\'s younger brother. Having been put to shame I came to seek protection from you who are the protector of all beings " (Vibheeshana said to Rama)."'

'"Leaving Lanka, my friends and my wealth I came to you. Now my life, kingdom and welfare are at your disposal."'

'"On hearing those words (of Vibheeshana) that were soothing to him as if he drank (Vibheeshana\'s love) with his both eyes, Rama asked Vibheeshana to truly relate the strength as well as weakness of the Rakshasas."'

'Then the Rakshasa (Vibheeshana) having heard that Rama of unwearied action would save him proceeded to speak out about the strength of Ravana.'

'"Oh Prince, by virtue of a boon granted by Brahma, the selfborn to the tenheaded Ravana, he cannot be killed by Gandharvas, Rakshasas and by all beings."'

'"My elder brother, the one who is younger to Ravana is a highly valiant one endowed with great prowess. He is Kumbhakarna and equal to Indra in war."'

'"Rama You might have heard of Prahastha who the commander in chief of his (Ravana\'s) army is by whom Manibhadra (Kubera\'s Commander of Army) was defeated in a comb at in Kailas (the abode of Siva)."'

'"He (Ravana\'s eldest son) who is possessed of Iguana skin on his hands (to protect), and with a shield that cannot be pierced and who remains unseen in comb at wielding a bow is Indrajith."'

'"Raghava Indrajith strikes when caught by a network of foes in war by becoming invisible because of satisfying fire god."'

'"Mahodara, Mahaparsva, Akampana are Rakshasas who are like the guards of the world. They are the commanders of his (Ravana\'s) army."'

'"Thousands of Rakshasas inhabit the city of Lanka living on flesh and blood and changing their form at will."'

'"The unassailable rulers of the world and even celestial beings have been shattered by Ravana accompanied by the Rakshasas."'

'Rama of mighty prowess having heard everything from Vibheeshana, examining in his mind, spoke.'

'"Vibheeshana Those actions resorted to by Ravana which have been spoken by you in essence are known to me."'

'"By Killing the tenheaded Ravana along with Prahastha and relatives I will make you the king. I am telling you, this is true."'

'"Even if Ravana enters the hell or underground or the abode of Brahma the creator, I will not let him be alive."'

'"I vow upon my three brothers that I will not enter Ayodhya without putting an end to Ravana along with his people, sons and relatives."'

'After having heard the words of Rama of untiring in action, Vibheeshana of righteous nature, started to speak with his head bent down (in reverence).'

'"I will render assistance with all my strength for storming Lanka, for killing the Rakshasas and for the army to enter."'

'When Vibheeshana had spoken in that manner, Rama was pleased and embraced him. He called for Lakshmana to get water from the ocean (for consecration).'

'"I am pleased with this highly intelligent Vibheeshana, a respectable one. I will coronate him at once as king of Rakshasas."'

'(Rama) having spoken that way, Saumithri crowned Vibheeshana as crowned king on the command of Rama amid Vanara army chiefs.'

'At that instant the Vanaras jumped, moving about exhibiting their joy on witnessing great Rama\'s grace saying "Good, good."'

'Hanuman and Sugriva enquired of Vibheeshana as to how to cross this ocean that is imperturbable along with the entire lot of energetic Vanara army.'

'"What strategy should we adopt to cross this abode of Varuna, the Lord of rivers and streams with the entire army of Vanaras?" (Hanuman and Sugriva asked Vibheeshana).'

'(Hanuman) having asked so, righteous Vibheeshana said, "O king Raghava We ought to go and seek refuge from the god of the ocean."'

'"This immeasurable great ocean was excavated by Sagara (A King of the Ikshvaku dynasty). The great ocean needs to do the task of Rama who is of the same race."'

'Vibheeshana having spoken in that manner, Sugriva accompanied by Lakshmana reached near Rama.'

'Thereafter broadnecked Sugriva started to communicate to Rama the advice of Vibheeshana about Sagara.'

'To Rama who was by nature righteous the advice (of Vibheeshana) was pleasing. To the brilliant Lakshmana of skilful action, to Sugriva the king of monkeys, Rama said smilingly.'

'"Lakshmana This advice of Vibheeshana is pleasing to me. Sugriva is learned, and you are always capable of good advice. That which appeals to both of you, and which is meaningful may be informed to me."'

'Heroic Rama having said that way to both, Lakshmana and Sugriva replied thus respectfully following tradition (with folded hands).'

'"O Raghava, the tiger among kings Why will this good advice given to us at this time by Vibheeshana be not pleasing?" Sugriva and Lakshmana said to Rama."'

'Without building a bridge over this terrific ocean, the abode of Varuna, it is not possible to cross over to Lanka even for Indra, suras or Asuras.'

'"Valiant Vibheeshana\'s words are true. Let us proceed and let us not waste time. Let us request Sagara to help the army to be able to proceed to Lanka ruled by Ravana (Sugriva and Lakshmana said to Rama)."'

'Then when they (Sugriva and Lakshmana) said so to Rama, he sat on Kusa grass mat on the shore of the ocean just as fire stayed in the sacrificial altar.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनविंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the nineteenth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"Then the heroic Rakshasa called Shardula entered into the area encamped by the army under Sugriva's command and saw the sign flag of the army."

'The evil minded raskshasa who was a spy of Ravana went back to Lanka speedily unruffled after having observed all over the camp and spoke these words to Ravana.'

'As if it is a second ocean deep and immeasurable, the ocean of Vanaras and Bears are heading towards Lanka (reported the spy).'

'"Great sons of Dasaratha, Rama and Lakshmana, endowed with beautiful form and exceptional fortitude have come and set their foot on the seashore and settled to come to Sita."'

'"Mighty king Ravana the army also is spread all over ten yojanas. I have seen going round the sky. You ought to know the real situation at once."'

'"O king at once your spies should be deployed there and entrusted to have claims either by conciliation or creating differences."'

"Ravana the tiger among Rakshasas, after having heard Shardula's words decided within himself and said to Suka who is good at work praising him very much as usual."

'"Departing quickly, speak to the king Sugriva boldly without getting disturbed but in a gentle way and communicate this message."'

'"O Sugriva, king of Vanaras You are born in a race of eminent kings, a mighty son of Rksharaja. Even a little harm has not been done to you by me. I am like your brother (Ravana\'s words to Sugriva to be communicated by Suka)."'

'"Sugriva What harm is done to you if I have brought the consort of prince? You are a wise one, go back to Kishkinda."'

'"It is not possible for Vanaras to get here even for Gandharvas or Devas also. What to say of humans and Vanaras? (You may tell this to Sugriva)."'

'Thus, commanded by the ruler of Rakshasas, Suka immediately transformed into a bird form and rose apace into the sky.'

'Suka having gone a long way in the sky to a distant place, stationed there spoke these words to Sugriva.'

'Thus, commanded by evil minded Ravana, Suka communicated everything as spoken by Ravana. At once the Vanaras rose and started to injure Suka with their fists.'

'At once the Vanaras violently seized the night ranger Suka and held him and threw him down to the ground from the sky.'

'Being attacked by Vanaras, Suka told these words. "Oh Kakuthsa Rama messengers should not be killed. It will be good to prevent the Vanaras."'

'"The envoy who puts aside the king\'s opinion and expresses his own opinion, which has not been said by the king ought to be killed."'

'After hearing the appeal of Suka and seeing the monkeys shouting, Rama spoke indicating not to kill him.'

'Suka, felt secure in the air and finding monkeys also settled, once again spoke these words.'

'"Oh Sugriva Who is rich in spirit and endowed with mighty prowess What should I convey to Ravana who makes the world cry?"'

'Suka having spoken in that way, Sugriva the leader of the monkeys who was not depressed in his spirit spoke these pleasant words to the Rakshasa spy.'

'"O Rakshasa, you are the one who deserves death (Convey to Ravana this as my word). You are an enemy to my friend, like wise you are not worthy of sympathy, not my well wisher and also not dear to me. You are Rama\'s enemy, so like your relative Vali you are to be killed."'

'"O Night ranger Ravana I shall kill all your sons, relatives, your kinsfolk. I shall come at once and even burn Lanka into ashes with my mighty prowess."'

'"O Foolish Ravana Even if you go to a secret place, or rendered invisible by your interposition, or go into the orbit of the Sun, or go underground to Patala or go to the feet of Lord Siva for protection, you cannot escape from Rama. You along with your brother will be slain."'

'"I do not see anyone who can save you in these three worlds, not Rakshasas, not devils or even Gandharvas."'

'"When the aged and old vulture Jatayu restrained you, why did you disregard and seize broadeyed Sita? Why did you not take her away in the presence of Rama or even Lakshmana?"'

'"You do not understand that the foremost of Raghu\'s, a benevolent one, is difficult to overcome even for Indra. He will take away your life with his extraordinary might."'

'"Then Angada, the noble one among Vanaras, the son of Vali, said," O King, to me it appears that he is not a messenger but a spy."'

'"While standing here surely he has assessed the entire strength of the army. I hope he is taken as a captive and not returned to Lanka."'

'Then having been commanded by the king he caught the forlorn wailing Rakshasa Suka and bound him.'

'"Thereafter Suka who was severely tormented by the Vanaras went towards benevolent Rama and wailed."'

'"If my wings are cut off and my eyes are injured, on account of that inauspicious act you will take on all sins of my life from the night I was born till the night I am dead leaving my original form, even will happen (Suka tells Rama)."'

'"Having heard the lamentation, Rama said to the Vanaras" Do not kill him. Set him free as he had come as an envoy."', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेविंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twentieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Then Raghava the destroyer of foes, offered his obeisance turning his face towards east, spread the kusa grass mat on the seashore and lay down resting his head upon his shoulders like a coiled serpent.'

'The shoulders that have been adorned with the best of gold, pearl and coral ornaments, were besmeared many times by supreme women.'

'The very charming shoulders, smeared with sandal paste and Agaru fragrance emitting the brilliance of the rising Sun.'

'(The shoulders) which resembled the coils of Takshaka (in chubbiness) a principal serpent, was graced by Sita while in bed, was bathed by the best of women with waters of Ganga.'

'The shoulders were long like the union of Yugas, which brought grief to the enemies in war and delight to the friends, and like the earth bound by the ocean on all sides.'

"The mighty armed Rama's arms were hardened like that of iron bars by the large number of arrows received by the left arm and strained by giving thousands of cows as gifts by the right arm. Rama was determined now to cross over the great ocean or meet the sea with death and lay down subdued and restrained like a sage."

'As Rama kept himself alert with a vow and lay on the kusa grass m at spread on the ground, three nights rolled fast.'

'Rama, a lover of dharma, who had political foresight, spent three nights waiting upon the ocean, the Lord of rivers.'

'Though Rama remained selfrestrained and respected the ocean well according to propriety, the ocean was dull and did not show its real form.'

"Enraged at the ocean, Rama's eyes turned red. He went near Lakshmana who was endowed with auspicious marks and thus addressed."

'"Why is it that the ocean does not show up to me? Indeed, calmness, forbearance, straightforwardness, politeness of speech are all attributes of virtuous qualities and one without these attributes are considered incapable."'

'"Indeed, the world treats one with respect, who praises himself, as an impudent one, an unchaste one and one who goes about with a rod of punishment (not the one who is virtuous)."'

'"O Lakshmana Neither fame nor popularity can win a battle front in this world."'

'"Saumithri Witness the crocodiles shattered by my ruthless arrows jumping and floating in the ocean with water splashed on all sides."'

'"Lakshmana See here the coils of serpents, huge snakes, fish and large sea elephants cut into pieces by me."'

'"I shall make the ocean dry up with its shells and conchs, fishes and crocodiles in this great combat."'

'"By my being tolerant, this ocean treats me to be incapable. Endowed with such qualities of forbearance, I will show the people (ocean)."'

'"The ocean has not shown his own form to me. O Lakshmana Get the bow and venomous snake like arrows, I will dry up the ocean and the Vanaras can walk by foot and go."'

'"(The ocean) Having made me angry, now I will torment the ocean even though it is imperturbable and has its limits. I will torment the ocean with its thousands of waves and mighty demons by my arrows and make the ocean cross its boundary."'

'Having spoken like that, Rama with his flaming red eyes seemed like the flame at the end of the universe and unassailable.'

'Bending the terrific bow, he released frightful arrows like Indra (who released thunderbolts) who performed a hundred sacrifices.'

'Glowing in brilliance like flame, the arrows of the best among the arrows pierced like snakes into the water of the ocean.'

'Then the ocean seemed terrible with the fish and crocodiles rushing out with the speed of water and powerful wind.'

'With the movement of the sea water filled with the conchs and shells suddenly terrific smoke whirling round and rising played around.'

'Those snakes with blazing hoods and glowing eyes residing in the underworld and the demons became oppressed.'

'Thousands of waves of the ocean rose like the peaks of Vindhya and Mandara mountains.'

'The waves rose up tossing and whirling about. The agitated Nagas and Rakshasas were thrown up by a highly disturbed ocean that produced a great sound.'

"Then Saumithri got up and rushed very fast to Rama who was stretching his bow exceedingly and breathing hard in anger and said, 'no more, no more' and seized the bow.", '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकविंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twenty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Thereafter, Rama uttered, "I shall make you dry up to the underworld", to the ocean that made his terrific presence.'

'"O Ocean When your water is dried up to the core by my arrows, huge sand will appear."'

'"O Ocean, now the monkeys will go to the other side of the shore on your drying up with all the creatures inhabiting you by the rain of arrows showered by me."'

'"You, who are the abode of demons are not aware of my valour and prowess. You are not aware of the sorrow that you will face from me."'

'Rama proceeded to stretch the mighty bow that resembled the rod of punishment of Brahma energized by Brahma and released that best of bows.'

'When Rama released the arrows from the bow, at once the sky to the earth including mountains trembled.'

'Then darkness engulfed the world, the directions were not noticeable and further the rivers were agitated.'

'The Sun and moon moved obliquely (from south to North) along with the stars. On account of the darkness that covered even the sun was not shining. The sky lighted by the meteors shone and unparalleled thunder shot forth.'

'Then terrific wind blew breaking forth the clouds, which is an abode of cold water, taking them away in upward direction breaking trees.'

'Huge clouds collected were moving at extraordinary speed in the sky breaking mountain peaks. Those clouds in the sky sent forth fire of lightning making a loud sound.'

'The creatures like humans etc. That could be seen and those that could not be seen like devils and ghosts remained still out of fear. Few other creatures came out of their place even though it was cold. Some were thrown off from their habitation in fear although they were together.'

'There after those waves of water with its creatures, serpents and demons were at once thrown off at terrific speed that was unprecedented. They were thrown beyond a yojana by the high tides.'

'Rama the destroyer of foes did not attempt at the ocean that went far from the boundary, which was transgressing and overweening.'

'Then Sagara, the Lord of the ocean himself rising like the Sun over the mighty Meru Mountain rose from the middle of the ocean.'

'Then the Lord of the Ocean shining like the Vaidurya stone decked in pure gold as if blazing appeared along with serpents.'

'Clad in red coloured robes, endowed with lotus petal like eyes having a wonderful wreath of diverse flowers on head, decked in shining ornaments of polished gold encrusted with precious gems from his own territory, he resembled the Himalayan Mountain with minerals. He had a hanging pearl necklace in the centre of his bosom shedding white lustre that resembled the Kausthuba of Lord Vishnu. With several tides moving near, and multitude of tides reaching the clouds threatening, surrounded by Goddesses of several forms and deities of important rivers like Ganga and Sindhu, the valiant Lord of the ocean greeted with folded palms and spoke these words to Rama who was wielding an arrow in his hand.'

'"Noble Rama Earth, wind, space, water, and fire, the five elements remain in their path strictly following their nature."'

'"I am fathomless and as such not capable of being swum across as it is my nature too. My fording will be a deviation. I proclaim to you (how you can cross)."'

'"O Lord of the land Out of desire or covetousness or even out of fear I will not be able to solidify the water infested with poisonous animals."'

'"O Rama I shall arrange a base in such a mode, by means of which the entire army of Vanaras can cross over the passage and I will also be seizing the poisonous animals and not be aggressive."'

'Then Rama said, "O abode of Varuna, listen to me. In which location should I allow this unfailing mighty arrow to descend?"'

'On hearing the question of Rama, the mighty ocean seeing the brilliant arrow spoke these words to him.'

'"To my north there is a holy place called Drumakulya, famous like you, and you have scope to act there (to descend the arrow)."'

'"Marauders of terrific action, who are enemies of gods whose chief is Abhiras, live there drinking my (ocean) water performing sinful acts."'

'"Rama I cannot tolerate the touch of ones who are sinful in action. Therefore your (of descending this arrow down) mighty unfailing arrow can be released on them."'

'On hearing the words of the request of Sagara and on account of seeing him, Rama let off the supreme arrow glowing (on the marauders).'

'By the letting down of the dart that resembled the glow of Indra that part of the land was indeed popularly known as Marakantara (Marwar and Bikaner region of Rajasthan).'

'At that part of the earth that was creviced by the piercing of the dart, water came out from the underworld.'

'That well (hole created by the dart) came to be known as Vrana. The water springing out of it forever is like sea water.'

'A crack caused in the ground by letting off the dart produced terrific sound and by that, the water in the cavities of the ground dried up.'

"Marukantaram is famous in the three worlds. Dasaratha's Rama, who is learned and has the valour of gods made the cavities dry and gave a boon."

"By virtue of Rama's boon Maru became a beautiful land with tender grass for cows, with less diseases, very ideal for fruits, roots, and juicy foods, for plenty of milk, and suitable for fragrance, diverse kinds of medicinal herbs. Endowed with these virtues it became a holy and auspicious place."

"Thereafter when that land of Drumakulyam was burnt (by Rama's arrow) the Lord of rivers looked at Rama who was learned in all sastras spoke these words."

'"Noble Rama This prosperous one named Nala is the son of Vishwakarma. Since he has obtained boons from his father, he is equal to his father in architecture."'

'"This monkey is full of zeal. He will build a bridge over me, and I will bear it. In that way he is like his father."'

'Having spoken in that way, the Sea God disappeared. Nala, the foremost of vanaras, got up there after and spoke these words to mighty Rama.'



'This fearsome ocean of mighty Sagara (dug by Sagara) then allowed a passage for Rama, out of fear of punishment and also to witness the building of a bridge.'

'"On the Mandara mountain Vishwakarma gave a boon to my mother. I am that Vishwakarma\'s own son, and I am like him at work by that cause. I have put in my memory all about the ocean. I am aware of the truth of the ocean. I could not speak of my qualities unless questioned. I can build a bridge over the abode of Varuna.Right away let the Vanara leaders get the material required for building the bridge (said Nala)."'

'Then directed by Rama the Vanara troop leaders in hundreds and thousands sprang up gladly all over the huge forest.'

'Mountain like bodied Vanara bulls there upon started collecting roots of trees from the foot of mountain and moved them into the sea.'

'The Vanaras brought sala, asvakarna, dhava, bamboo, kutaja arjuna, palmira, tilaka, trisaira, bilva, saptaparni trees karnikara plants with blossoms, mango trees and ashoka trees and dumped into the ocean.'

"Lifting some trees with roots and some without roots like the staff of Indra's flag, Vanaras hurled down the trees into the sea."

'They brought palmira, dadima, coconut, karira, bakula and nimba trees and dropped all of them into the ocean.'

'The Vanaras of huge body size and strong like elephants collected stones and mountains, lifted them, and transported into the sea.'

'At once the water threw up (by dropping the mountains) rose, touching the sky and spreading.'

'On account of throwing into the sea it got stirred up Others held the rope over a hundred yojanas in breadth (to make it even).'

'Nala started the task of building the huge bridge in the centre of the ocean with Vanaras.'

'Others held sticks and some held logs of wood and reeds following the command of Rama, hundreds of Vanaras who looked like clouds and mountain tops built the bridge.'

'The Vanaras who were like Danavas, huge mountains in size were seen seizing boulders from the mountain, the trees with blossoms, and creepers for binding the bridge and running.'

'By hurling off the mountains in that lofty ocean and throwing stones, a tumultuous sound arose.'

'Elephants like monkeys rejoiced over building speedily fourteen yojanas the distance of the bridge on the first day.'

'In the same order the Vanaras of fierce bodies and extremely strong ones soon built twenty yojanas on the second day.'

'Endowed with huge body that way the Vanaras built extremely fast, twenty one yojanas on the third day.'

'There upon at once Vanaras of great speed built twenty two yojanas on the fourth day.'

'Similarly, on the fifth day the Vanaras endowed with great impetus built twenty three yojanas and crossed Mount Suvela.'

'Nala the son of Vishwakarma, the foremost of the Vanaras and strong like his father built the bridge in the sea.'

'The bridge was built on the sea, an abode of crocodiles, was auspicious, glorious, and looked like the street in space (milky path).'

'The Gandharvas, gods and even siddhas felt happy and reached their stationed in the sky to see the wonderful bridge.'

'Gods and Gandharvas witnessed the bridge built by Nala that was ten yojanas in width and hundred yojanas in length.'

'The monkeys were jumping about here and there roaring (in joy). All creatures witnessed the bridge that was inconceivable, marvellous, thrilling, and impossible to build constructed in the sea.'

'The glorious Vanaras in thousands of crores reached the other side of the sea from the bridge constructed in the great sea.'

"That huge bridge was well built, magnificent, evenly built, and extensive and looked charming like the partition in a woman's hair."

'There upon Vibheeshana holding the mace stood on the other side of the ocean along with his friends to slay the enemies.'

'Sugriva addressed Rama of truthful valour and said, "You mount on heroic Hanuman, let Lakshmana climb on Angada. These Vanaras will hold you up in the sky and assist you to cross the ocean."'

'Accompanied by Lakshmana and joined together with Sugriva, glorious and righteous Rama walked in front of the army.'

'While some monkeys walked in the middle some went in the side, some others were falling down in water (for the want of space to walk) some others went like birds in the path of the sky.'

'The terrific sound caused by the frightening advancement of massive monkey troops the sound of the ocean got drowned.'

"The Vanara army having crossed the bridge of Nala by the king's order settled on the other shore that was filled with several roots and fruits."

'"O Rama the Lord of human beings Let you win over enemies and rule the land for ever." Thus, hailing Rama who is worshipped by humans as well as gods, was worshipped with auspicious words (by the aforesaid gods, siddhas and charanas).', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्वाविंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twenty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Perceiving the portents, Rama spoke these words embracing Saumithri who was aware of the portents.'

'"Lakshmana Arrange a place in this forest where there is cool water and fruits for the battalions of the army, we shall remain (alert)."'

'"Dreadful warriors, Bears, monkeys, and Rakshasas will be slain, and I foresee that which bodes destruction of people."'

'"The wind is blowing mixed with dust, even the earth is cracking, mountain tops are shaking, and huge trees are breaking and falling down."'

'"Clouds resembling raw flesh in colour, are making harsh frightening sounds, and rain mixed with drops of blood."'

'"The twilight in red sandal colour is very frightening. The Sun is blazing, raining masses of fire in variegated colours."'

'"The wild animals all over have a piteous look and wailing in low tone standing opposite the Sun is indicating fear."'

'"The moon devoid of glow even in the night is like the Sun with black rays around and red aura behind (the black)."'

'"Lakshmana the white Sun is appearing in copper colour around with black colour in the centre which had not been seen before. It is small and dreary."'

'"Lakshmana the stars devoid of brightness are indicating as though it is the time of dissolution of the universe?"'

'"The crows, hawks and eagles are falling down like small animals. Also, the jackals are creating fear by making howls."'

'"The earth will turn into a mass of flesh and blood and will be covered by the mountains and tridents hurled by Vanaras and Rakshasas."'

'All the Vanaras turning their direction will go immediately and now itself, swiftly to the city ruled by Ravana (said Rama to Lakshmana).'

'Rama, the subduer of enemies in war, a celebrated one having spoken this way proceeded towards Lanka going in front wielding a bow.'

'Then Vibheeshana, Sugriva and all bulls among Vanaras determined in the matter of slaying (the enemies) went roaring.'

'To make Rama happy, the excessively heroic Vanaras made monkey actions. Seeing that Rama felt happy.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रयोविंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twenty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"The army of Vanaras settled that way by Rama's command shone like the autumnal full moon with auspicious stars."

'The frightened army (of Vanaras) that was like a tormented ocean started moving swiftly, shaking like the earth.'

'There upon having settled down, the army hordes heard from Lanka terrific and tumultuous noise of drums and percussion instruments that caused horripilation.'

'The leaders of Vanara troops felt very happy at the noise from (Lanka) which they were unable to tolerate and roared louder (than that in joy).'

'Even the Rakshasas heard the roaring of Vanaras in their pride that was bellowing like that of clouds in the sky.'

"Afflicted by sorrow upon seeing the colourful flags and posts of Lanka even Rama's thoughts went about thinking of Sita."

'The doveeyed Sita is obstructed by Ravana there (at Lanka) like the planet Rohini is caught by the red coloured planet (Mars).'

'Heroic Rama heaving hot and long breath looking at Lakshmana spoke these words that were good for him at that time.'

'"Lakshmana, you may see the city of Lanka elevated on top of the mountain as though clasping the sky, like the one created in the mind of Vishwakarma."'

'"This Lanka appears splendid with a mass of skyscrapers like white clouds covering the path of Vishnu in the sky."'

'"Lanka is filled with flocks of birds of several kinds singing sweetly, the gardens with charming flowers and fruits are delighting like auspicious gardens of Chaitrara, the garden of Kubera, the god of wealth."'

'"You may see the trees shaking violently by the pleasant breeze, inhabited by proud birds, drunken honeybees and crowded with cuckoos and other birds (Rama said to Lakshmana)."'

"Dasaratha's son Rama thus talked to Lakshmana in that manner and asked to divide the task of the army in accordance with what is said in sastras."

'Let the valiant Angada who is difficult to win over, who is a terror to the enemies, take the army along with Nila and remain at the centre (of the army structure).'

'Let Rshaba the bull among Vanaras approach the south side of the army accompanied by his troop of Vanara contingent and remain there.'

'"Let the mighty Gandhamadana, a difficult one to conquer like a proud elephant, take the battalion of army and stay on the right side"'

'"I and Lakshmana will be alert at the head side. Let Jambavan Sushena and the three chiefs of Bears who are strong and quick at sighting remain protecting the belly of the army."'

'"Just as Pracheta who is covered by brilliance, rules the western side of the world, let the king of Vanaras protect the hips and loin portion of the Vanara army."'

'The Vanara army force organized that way to protect the Vanaras, shone like the mass of clouds in heaven.'

'Vanaras resolved to go taking peaks of mountains and huge trees to smash Lanka in war.'

'Thus resolved the Vanara leaders in their mind to crush Lanka with its mountain peaks into powder with their bare fists, indeed.'

'Having heard Sugriva, there after splendid Rama spoke thus. "The army is divided (placed in position). Suka may be relieved."'

"Having heard Rama's words Sugriva, the mighty king of Vanaras was happy and relieved the envoy on the instruction of Rama."

'Relieved by the word of Rama, tormented Suka who was highly terrified returned to the king of Rakshasas.'

'Laughing at Suka, Ravana spoke these words. "Why are your wings fastened? Your wings have been clipped, it appears!. I suppose you have not fallen under the clutches of the fickle minded Vanaras!"'

'Then Suka who was caught by fear, having been asked by the king, trembling away thus replied to the Rakshasa king. "I went to the northern shore of the ocean and delivered gently the speech just as it was conveyed by you."'

'As soon as they saw me, the enraged Vanaras rising up (into the sky) took hold of me and started injuring me and slaying me.'

'"O king of Rakshasas! It was not possible to negotiate there with the Vanaras). I had no opportunity to interrogate with them. By nature, Vanaras are violent and are highly furious."'

'"The life of Viradha, Kabhanda and Khara has been taken away by Rama. Accompanied by Sugriva they have set their foot into Lanka for Sita\'s sake."'

'"Mighty Raghava having crossed the salt sea and reached the shore of Rakshasas, organized them (Vanaras) and stood wielding a bow."'

'"Thousands of army forces of monkeys and Bears resembling mountains and clouds have settled on the ground."'

'Alliance is not possible between Rakshasas and army of Bears and Vanaras, just as alliance is not possible between gods and demons.'

'"They will reach the boundary wall. At once you may do one of the two that I suggest you do. I implore you either to give away Sita or give good battle."'

"Angry, redeyed Ravana, having heard Suka's words spoke as though he would burn him with his glance."

'"Even if gods, Gandharvas and demons come to wage war with me, even if all the worlds threaten me, I shall not give away Sita."'

'"Just as drunken bees reach the trees with blossoms in spring when will my arrows attack Rama?"'

'"When will the glowing arrows from my quiver, that are fit to pierce in thousands, be able to goad Rama like the burning fire sticks goad the elephants?"'

'"Just as the rising Sun light obscures the radiance of all (other stars) when will I obscure him surrounded by his army?"'

'"I have the speed of the ocean and swiftness like the WindGod. Rama does not know this and desires to wage war with me."'

'"Rama has not seen the poisonous arrows in my quiver in battle. Therefore, he is desiring comb at with me."'

'"He has not known my valour in war. Entering the enemy\'s army holding my formidable Veena, making challenging sounds with the sharp heads of arrows, causing tumultuous noise like the sound of cry of destitute and frightened ones with iron arrows, I will play the Veena of my bow in hand."'

'"It is not possible (to win over) for the thousand eyed Indra, or even Varuna, the god presiding over water, or even for Yama, the god of death and again even for Kubera the god of wealth to face the fire of my arrows (said Ravana to Suka)."', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकावेयुध्दकाण्डेचतुर्विंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twenty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'On hearing about Rama, the son of Dasaratha crossing the shore of the ocean along with the army, exuberant Ravana spoke to his ministers Suka and Saarana.'

'"That all the Vanara army together with Rama have crossed the arduous ocean and that the construction of a bridge (is possible) in the sea is not known before."'

'"It is not believable even to me that they constructed a bridge in the sea. Surely I wish to know the size of their army."'

'"Both of you enter Vanara\'s army without their knowledge and know about the size of the army, of Rama and Sugriva\'s ministers, of army chiefs who are in the forefront, of the warriors, how they have built bridge in the middle of the sea, about the location of Vanaras and in the same way the efforts and valour of heroes Rama and Lakshmana, I ought to know truly."'

'Among those energetic Vanaras, who is the chief of the army? Knowing all these matters, it is fit for you to return quickly.'

'Having accepted the order, both the Rakshasa heroes, Suka and Saarana took the form of Vanaras and entered the Vanara army.'

'There upon both Suka and Saarana did not know the numbers (of the army) at that time as they could not count the numbers from there as it could not be conceived. It caused the raising of their hair.'

'The ocean of army settled on the mountain summits, in caverns and caves, on the shores of the ocean, in the forests and adjoining gardens some who crossed the sea some in the process of crossing settled all over was witnessed by the Rakshasas. It was never ending and making terrific noise.'

'Brilliant Vibheeshana saw both Suka and Saarana hidden in the army. He took hold of them and brought to the notice of Rama.'

'"O conqueror of enemy\'s citadels! these are spies from Lanka, Suka and Saarana who have come to find us out."'

'The two (Rakshasa spies) got worried to look at Rama and also lost hope of their life. Caught up with fear they lifted their palms greeting Rama and expressed these words.'

'"O noble one! We have come to you assigned by Ravana. O delight of Raghu race, thus we arrived here to know about the entire strength of your army."'

'"On hearing (the spies) Dasaratha\'s son Rama who remains devoted to the wellbeing of all beings spoke these words smiling at both of them."'

"After observing our entire army carefully, acting appropriately (according to Ravana's words) and accomplishing your task you may freely return (said Rama to the spies)."

'"If you have not seen even a bit, you ought to see. Or else Vibheeshana will show you the total army."'

'As you have been caught by us like this you need not have apprehension of your life. Those who do not possess wield or those who are envoys ought not to be slayed.'

'"Vibheeshana! Even though they are spies seeking to divide the enemy army as both the night rangers have been requesting, you may set them free."'

'"Upon entering the city of Lanka, you may tell my words to the king of Rakshasas, the younger brother of Kubera just as it was told by me."'

'"Let him display the strength on which he has abducted my Sita along with his army and relations at his will."'

'At dawn tomorrow, you may see how I will crush the arches of the entrance of Lanka city and the strength of Rakshasas."'

'"Tomorrow at the dawn of the day I will release my dreadful anger on Ravana and even on Rakshasas just as the thunderbolt of Indra was released on Rakshasas."'

'Having heard the reply of Rama, both the Rakshasas Suka and Saarana praising Rama saying, "Victory to you!" reached Lanka and said to the king of Rakshasas as follows.'

'"O king of Rakshasas! Vibheeshana held us captive for slaying us. But righteous self, Rama, the highly effulgent one released us on seeing."'

'"Exuberant Rama and Lakshmana, highly brilliant Vibheeshana, and Sugriva who resembles Indra in his valour, are like rulers of the world and are heroic, wielders of weapons and bulls among men. If all four of them come together there in that manner, they will unearth the arch ways and even the city of Lanka. They are capable even if the Vanaras are kept away."'

'"If we see Rama\'s form and his weapon it is enough. He can alone slay even when all the other three keep away."'

'"Even if Rama and Lakshmana are protected, and even Sugriva also, the entire army seems formidable like suras and asuras."'

'Perceiving the truthful and beneficial words spoken by Saarana, without hesitation, King Ravana replied.'

'"Even if Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas put together attack me in war and not even for the fear of the whole world will I surrender Sita?"'

'As you are vanquished by the noble Vanaras you are frightened like this and thinking it is good to surrender Sita.'

'"What adversary can win me in war? You ought to know this", said Ravana. Then Ravana, the king of Rakshasas having spoken that way went up to the snow white palace which was of the height of many Palmira trees wishing to see (the Vanaras).'

'Deluded with anger Ravana along with both the spies observed the sea, the mountains and the woods crowded with monkeys in that region of the earth.'

'Ravana seeing the innumerable army force of monkeys which was impossible to count again enquired looking at Saarana.'

'"Who among the Vanaras is foremost, who is valiant, strong in prowess and most energetic? Who are their equals in the earlier war, you may tell in order?"'

'"Whose advice does Sugriva listen to? Who is the chief of the army of Vanaras? Saarana, I wish to know truly."'

'Hearing the words asked by Rakshasendra, Saarana, who knew the important ones, thus spoke out about the important monkey leaders.'

'"Who, surrounded by thousands of troops is roaring aloud facing Lanka, with whose roar entire Lanka with its boundary walls, archways, mountains and woods are trembling, that one who stands in the forefront of Sugriva the Lord of all Vanara troops is known as the great Nila."'

'"The valiant one who has lifted his arms up and stands on the earth enraged facing Lanka, a highly excited one who is tall and expanded like a mountain peak in form and colour of lotus filament who is hitting his tail again and again on the earth and making noise with his tail, which is resounding in ten directions is Vanara leader by name Angada who has been crowned by Sugriva. This crowned prince is challenging to have war with you."'

'"He is the son of Vali and is similar to him and is ever beloved of Sugriva. Jus t like Varuna fights for the cause of Indra, he is ready to show his valour for the cause of Rama."'

'"He is a well wisher of Raghava, called Hanuman. He had come to see Janaka\'s daughter, and his intellect is the cause for all that."'

'"This valiant Vanara himself with many troops and several battalions of the Vanara king is marching to crush you."'

'"Behind this Vali\'s son is Nala surrounded by a huge army force. He is heroic in war. He is the cause of construction of the bridge."'

'"Ten hundred crores one lakh and eight of these warriors who are unassailable, cruel, dreadful and terrible prowess are following the Vanara leader. They have made their body stiff, tossing their limbs, and are roaring in anger. They are standing up and stretching their limbs in sandalwood forest. Nala the leader alone is wishing to crush the army and Lanka."'

'"One who resembles silver in colour is Swetha. He is an intelligent one with terrific prowess, and a warrior is well known in the three worlds. Swetha is quickly coming towards Sugriva, dividing the Vanara army forces and again proceeding swiftly."'

'"He who was residing on the banks of Gomathi earlier, which was delightful with a range of mountain peaks extending far, was ruling this kingdom from the mountain Sankochana. He is Kumuda by name. He drags his troops delightfully the ones with hairy long tails, some of coppery red colour, some yellow and some with white tails. Such a Vanara called Kumuda is dragging hundred thousand Vanaras, some fastened and some scattered. He is one who has no pity and is frightening to look at. Single handed he is aspiring to crush Lanka with its army in war."'

'"O king! He who is like a lion, of tawny colour with long hair, who is steady, who is looking at Lanka as though he is going to burn with his eyes, he who is followed by thirty hundred thousand Vanara warriors of dreadful form and terrific valour are marching to crush Lanka, is called Rambha the leader of the troop. He was always ruling over Vindhya, Krishnagiri and Sudarsanam mountains."'

'"Oh! king of Rakshasas! He who has made his ears stiff, yawning again and again, who is not afraid of death, who will not go back from war, who is looking obliquely and seeing his tail reacting in anger violently and roaring like a lion is a very strong leader called Sarabha. He is a very fast one, a leader of troops, ever in delight. He lives in Salveya mountain."'

'"O King! Under him are forty lakhs of strong warriors known as Viharas."'

'"He who is huge like a cloud covering the sky, roaring like a lion making noise like the beating of the drums, who is eager to wage war, who stands amid Vanaras like Indra in the midst of suras, who is ever difficult to resist in war is known as Panasa is a great warrior. He resides in the Paariyatra mountains."'

'"Fifty lakhs of best warriors are under him. They are in separate units."'

'"He who is stationed there on the shore like a second sea fluttering the division of army and terrifying is known as Vinata. He is a leader who goes about drinking the waters of the Parnasa, the best among the rivers. He has a sixty hundred thousand army force of Vanaras under him."'

'"The valiant and powerful troop leaders are a part of units of the army under Vanara called Krodhana. He is challenging you for combat."'

'"He who is of an orange colour body of hand some form, who nourishes it ever and who is proud of his strength, a glorious one known as Gava ya is coming towards you angrily with disregard for Vanaras."'

'"He has seventy lakhs under his command. Single handed with army force is aspiring to crush Lanka."'

'"They are difficult to resist, can change their form at will and are strong. These fierce troops, the best of the monkeys, have their units of army force."', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषड्विंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twenty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'"I will describe the Vanara force, who are not caring for their lives for the cause of Raghava. You may see."'

'"One who is of terrific action, whose long tail with plenty of hair of different colours like red, white, yellow with shining ends shining like the scattered rays of the rising sun is holding and dragging on the ground is a leader known as Hara."'

'"Standing in attention near Sugriva are hundreds and thousands of warriors holding huge trees aspiring to climb Lanka and controlling the Vanaras at the back prominently and following."'

'"O King! Standing like dark clouds, black in colour like collyrium, who are of unfailing valour in war, innumerable in numbers, like the small particles of sand on the other bank of ocean, who cannot be counted are moving towards you. They are from mountains, riverbanks, and difficult locations. Those highly ferocious Bears are advancing towards you."'

'"O king! In the midst of these (Vanaras) stands one with frightening eyes and fearful looks, just like Parjanya (RainGod) is surrounded by clouds, is the Lord of all these Bears called Dhumra. He dwells at the great Rkshavana mountain drinking Narmada\'s (river) water."'

'"See this one like a mountain, he is the brother of Dhumra. Even though he is similar to his brother in body form and his valour is great. As such he is superior among leaders. He is called Jambavan, one of valourous deeds, devoted to elders and intolerant in killing."'

'"His assistance was given to Indra in the war between Devas and demons and in turn he obtained many boons."'

'Appearing with hairybody glowing like fire like the Rakshasas and demons, many of them in huge form are climbing mountain peaks without caring for death and go about throwing rocks.'

'"O king! This Lord of monkeys, whom whether he is jumping like monkeys or standing is the leader of the leaders, whom the monkeys are looking at standing is called Dhamba, a mighty powerful, fearsome leader and Lord of monkeys. He is surrounded by a strong army like the thousand eyed Indra."'

'"He who stands at one yojana touches a mountain with his flanks, so also gets up and reaches a yojana height with his body, is Sannadana. He is the grandfather of Vanaras. There is no one who has a bigger body size than him among the four legged ones. He had fought war with Indra and is well known for not losing in the battle."'

'"His valour is equal to that of Indra. He is born to Gandharva, a maiden of the god of fire. He was created for the sake of assisting gods in the war between gods and demons."'

'"O King of Rakshasas! This Vanara who is exceptional among Vanaras, a commander of troops by name Krathana, who is not boastful in wars, lives on Kailas, the king of mountains which is frequented by many Kinnaras, on which your brother king Kubera son of Vysravana stays under Jambu tree and strolls for his pleasure."'

'"He is surrounded with thousand crores of his Vanara force and with his own force he intends to crush Lanka."'

'"There is one who roams around Ganga, frightening herds of elephants, remembering the earlier enmity between elephants and Vanaras. This leader of commanders goes about mountain caves, trees and mountains waging war with elephants."'

'"The chief of the army of monkeys and the excellent one among Vanaras revels on the mountain Usirabeejam like the mountain Mandara on the bank of river Hymavathi just as Indra in heaven."'

'"Thousand lakhs of mighty strong Vanaras who are proud of their valour and prowess roaring like lions follow him."'

'"He alone is the leader of the great Vanaras, O king. He is called Pramathi, a commander and a difficult one to resist."'

'"You see him (Pramathi) who resembles a cloud risen up by the wind you may also see the reddish brown dust particles lifted up by excessive whirling of the wind all over and also the furious Vanara army moving swiftly."'

'"These hundred and hundred thousand black monkeys with a tail like that of a cow called Golangulas, endowed with black coloured face, fearsome and with extraordinary strength, watching the bridge constructed, surround Gavaksha the leader, who himself is a Golangula and of great speed. They intend to demolish Lanka with their vigour."'

'"O king! Where the trees give fruit in all seasons which is inhabited by honeybees, whose leaves shine similar to that of Sunshine, where birds animals and all ever shining in golden colour of the Sun, where sages and great souls reside without leaving where trees always yield tasty fruits and have valuable honey in such a delightful golden mountain Vanara leader named Kesari, the chief of all chief Vanaras revels."'

'"O sinless king! there are sixty thousand golden mountains. In the midst of them is this golden mountain just as you are in the midst of the Rakshasas. On the last mountain the Vanaras with brown coloured face, white face, coppery red face and yellow face like honey with sharp teeth like lions, who have nails as weapons, four toothed ones like lions, fearsome ones like tiger, dangerous to approach, all of them like serpents with flaming venomous tongues, with long uplifted tails, like huge elephants in rut in mountain size, roaring like lions, thundering clouds, with round brownish red eyed ones, fearful while walking and causing appalling uproar all of them dwell on the last mountain. They are watching to demolish your Lanka as they look at it."'

'"O king! He who is known as Satabali, is a famous one on the earth, is a valiant hero, a leader. He stands in the middle aspiring for victory ever worshipping Sun. He alone with his army is intending to demolish Lanka."'

'"He is indomitable, strong and heroic. He will not give up his virility. For the pleasure of Rama, he will not feel pity for his life (he will give up his life)."'

'"Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Nila each of these Vanara leaders have ten crores of army under them."'

'"So also, those best of Vanaras of many kinds residing in Vindhya mountain of great valour in large numbers is impossible to count."'

'"O, Monarch! All of them are highly prominent, their stature equal to high hills and all of them are capable of levelling the earth by uprooting and razing its mountains to the ground in a moment."', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तविंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twenty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"Then Ravana the king of Rakshasas having heard Saarana's words and described the strength (of Vanaras) Suka spoke these words."

'"O King! like a banyan tree on the island, like Sala trees on the Himalayan Mountain these people are stationed. You may see them marching. They are strong to encounter, can change form at their free will. They look like gods and Danavas in war and have the valour of gods."'

'"These Vanaras are nine, five and seven thousand crores in number. They are in many thousands of Sankhas and Vrindas."'

'"These are allies of Sugriva ever residing at Kishkinda. They are born to celestial gods and Gandharvas and can change their form at their will."'

'"Do you see two of them standing there? They are young and have the form of gods. They are Mainda and Dwivida. Both of them are similar in war and none equal them in war."'

'"They drank the nectar of immortality with the permission of Brahma. These leaders are aspiring to destroy Lanka by their prowess."'

'"O Lord! You may see the one standing there like an elephant who can churn up the sea when he is angry. He has come to Lanka earlier, seen Sita and gone back. You may see that he has come again."'

'"He is the eldest son born of Kesari and the son of WindGod and is popularly known as Hanuman. He leapt over the sea and came."'

'"He is a jewel among Vanaras. He can change his form at his will. He is endowed with physical strength and charm. Being existent everywhere like windgod his cause cannot be prevented like that of wind god."'

'When he was a child, on seeing the rising Sun, he travelled three thousand yojanas and said, "I will eat up the Sun otherwise I will not be appeased\', being proud of his strength."'

'"Unassailable even for gods, sages and Danavas to reach the Sun god, he fell down near the eastern part."'

'"By falling on the mountain one of the jaws of the monkey got broken. This is the reason that he is known as Hanuman."'

'"I came to know about him through one of my contacts. His strength, his appearance and glory are indescribable."'

'"This monkey is intending to demolish this Lanka single handed. How can you forget about (the task of) setting his tail on fire entrusted by you to Dhoomakethu?"'

'"O king! the king who is not distant from him, a dark complexioned, one with lotus eyes who never transgresses his righteousness, who is a great charioteer of Ikshvaku race who knows use of Vedas, who is choicest, who knows the weapons presided over by Brahma whose arrows can pierce through the sky and even mountains whose anger is like anger of death, whose valour is like that of Indra whose consort has been borne away from Janasthana is Rama. He is advancing towards you to wage war with you."'

'"To his right is his brother known as Lakshmana whose body radiates like gold, he has broad chest, red eyes, dark curly hair. He is as dear as his life to Rama. He is skilled in moral science and warfare. He is the foremost and the best among wielders of weapons."'

'"He is one who does not forgive (Rama\'s enemies), difficult to win, indomitable, victorious, strong and wise one. He is the right hand of Rama and external breath of his life."'

'"For the cause of Rama, he will spare his life. He too is intent upon destroying all Rakshasas."'

'"The one who is near Rama\'s left who sought Rama\'s refuge and stands surrounded by Rakshasas and protected is the king Vibheeshana."'

'"He is a prosperous king of the kings of Lanka. He has been consecrated by Rama, filled with anger he is advancing to wage war with you."'

'"The one whom you see standing in the midst is the king of all chiefs of the Vanara army, a highly glorious one, steady like a mountain. like Himalayas that outshines all mountains, he surpasses all in fame, in intellect, in wisdom and in lineage. That monkey chief resides in the mountain cave fort with thickly grown trees around in the middle of Kishkinda, which is difficult to access, and is surrounded by his army chiefs. See the golden chain on him shining away with hundred lotuses in which stands Lakshmi installed which is difficult even for gods and human beings to covet. In the same way as the golden chain, even his beloved Tara and kingdom of the monkeys was permanently bestowed upon him by Rama after slaying Vali."'

'"It is said by wise men that hundred thousand crores multiplied by hundred thousand crores as Sankha."'

'A lakh of Sanku is known as Maha Sanku. A lakh of Maha Shanka is spoken as Vrinda. A lakh of Vrindas is spoken as Maha Brinda. A lakh of Maha Vrindas is known as Padma. One lakh Padmas is known as Maha Padma and a lakh of Maha Padmas is known as Kharva. A lakh of Kharvas is known as Maha Kharva and a lakh of Maha Kharvas is known as a Samudra. A lakh of Samudras is known as an Ogha. A lakh of Oghas is popularly known as Maha Ogha.'

'"In this manner (surrounded by) thousand crore Sankhas, a hundred thousand MahaSankhas, so also by a hundred Vrindas and thousand MahaVrindas, so also by a hundred Padmas and a thousand Mahapadmas, similarly by a hundred Kharvas nay by a Samudra, and similarly by a hundred Oghas and a hundred crore MahaOghas of monkey warriors, accompanied by gallant Vibheeshana and his ministers Sugriva the king of monkeys is ever surrounded by the great army of highly valiant and strong warriors is marching to wage war.'

'"O Great King! Observing the ocean of army close by their appearing cruel like a blazing planet, make supreme efforts to be victorious and not to be defeated in the hands of the enemy."', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टाविंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the twenty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'There after Ravana having heard the words spoken by Suka about the army of Vanara heroes, seeing Lakshmana of extraordinary valour, the right shoulder of Rama standing close by Rama his own brother Vibheeshana close by  the king of Vanaras, Sugriva of fierce valour and Angada the son of Vali (the son of Indra who wields thunderbolt)  and valiant Hanuman Jambavan who is difficult to conquer Sushena, Nila, Kumuda, bull among the leaping animals Nala likewise Gaja, Gavaksha, Sarabha, Mainda and Dwivida got a little broken hearted and mixed with fury started to rebuke both the heroes Suka and Saarana.'

'There after Ravana having heard the words spoken by Suka about the army of Vanara heroes, seeing Lakshmana of extraordinary valour, the right shoulder of Rama standing close by Rama his own brother Vibheeshana close by  the king of Vanaras, Sugriva of fierce valour and Angada the son of Vali (the son of Indra who wields thunderbolt)  and valiant Hanuman Jambavan who is difficult to conquer Sushena, Nila, Kumuda, bull among the leaping animals Nala likewise Gaja, Gavaksha, Sarabha, Mainda and Dwivida got a little broken hearted and mixed with fury started to rebuke both the heroes Suka and Saarana.'

'(That Ravana) with his throat choked with anger spoke indignantly and harshly to both Suka and Saarana who stood with their heads bent down in supplication.'

'"It is not proper for those ministers dependent on a capable ruler who has the power to check and hold forth, to speak that which is unpleasant."'

'"Is it appropriate for both of you to praise the enemy this way before war?"'

'"You have not grasped that which is the essence of political wisdom in the sastras in spite of waiting upon elders, teachers and parents which was in vain."'

'"Even if you have grasped you have not understood the meaning or out of intensity of your ignorance. Or else I am bearing foolish ones like you who are not fit to be ministers. Out of good luck I am ruling this sovereignty."'

'"Did you not have fear of death when you spoke such harsh words to me, who can by mere order make good or evil to you?"'

'"Trees may remain unscathed even on touching forest fire, but those who are punishable do not remain unpunished on account of the king and are treated harshly."'

'"I would have slayed these two sinners who praise the enemy side, if my anger had not softened and remembered their earlier services."'

'"You get away from here, disappear from here. On the contrary since I remember your earlier actions performed by you, I do not wish to kill you. Indeed, both of you are devoid of love and are ungrateful. You stand killed (already)."'

"Ravana, having spoken that way, both Suka and Saarana felt shy and withdrew from speaking words of praise of Ravana saying, 'Let you be victorious'."

'Ravana, the tenheaded one, then said to Mahodara who was standing nearby swiftly bring spies who are experts in policy to me.'

"(Ravana) Having said so, Mahodara ordered the spies to approach the king quickly. On reaching they greeted the king with folded hand s promoting h i m to' be victorious' and stood."

'There upon the Lord of Rakshasas, spoke these words to those spies who are dependable ones, warriors devoid of fear of enemies.'

'"From here you go and reach there you may observe perceptions of Rama and of others close to him, his ministers and those who have reached there in affection to him."'

'"You may see how he goes to sleep, how he wakes up etc., what he does, everything. You may come after knowing everything."'

'"Wise kings of the land, having known about enemies from the spies destroy enemies in war with little effort."'

"The spies then gladly uttered the words 'be it so', went round the king in reverence and departed with Saardula leading in front."

'Then the spies circumambulated the great Rakshasa king and having done so went to the place where Rama and Lakshmana were stationed.'

'Reaching the Suvela mountain in disguise, they saw Rama and Lakshmana along with Sugriva and Vibheeshana.'

'Those Rakshasas were bewildered with fear on looking at the army. Righteous Vibheeshana recognized them on seeing them.'

'By chance Vibheeshana seized Saardula, the evil Rakshasa who was moving in that army.'

'As the monkeys attempted to kill him (Saardula), compassionate Rama released him and also the other Rakshasas.'

'Harassed by the valorous and swift Vanaras, those Rakshasas lost their senses and returned to Lanka gasping and panting.'

'Thereafter, the spies reported to the king of Lanka that Raghava had camped with an unshakable army at the Suvela mountain.'

'On hearing from the spies that Rama has camped with a great army, Ravana got a little panicky and said these words to Saardula.'

'"O Forest ranger! Your face is not as it should be and also pitiable. Hope the angry enemies have not done anything to you."'

'And there after questioned by him (Ravana) Saardula revealed these words overwhelmed by fear, in faint tone to the tiger among Rakshasas.'

'"O King! the Vanara heroes are valiant and highly powerful. They are also protected by Rama. It is not possible to spy on them."'

'"It is not possible to converse with them or to question and or to examine, since they are guarded all over by mountains like Vanaras."'

'"No sooner I entered their army, I was detected. I was forcibly seized by their guards and rolled on the ground."'

'"The monkeys had beaten me with fists, bitten my palms with teeth, beaten me intensely and paraded me in the army indignantly."'

'"With all my limbs wet with bleeding, control over senses lost, after parading, I was led to the assembly of Rama."'

'"While smitten by the monkeys, offering salutation with folded hands, and pleading for protection from Raghava, luckily, I am alive."'

'"Having filled the great ocean with rocks and stones in that way, taking position at the entrance of Lanka Rama stands equipped with arms."'

'"O glorious King! After releasing me, Rama is advancing into Lanka surrounded by mountains like a monkey army in the form of Garuda."'

'"Before Rama reaches the boundary, the wall, do one thing quickly. Either give away Sita or set out to give a good war."'

'"Having heard what has been said by Saardula, Rakshasa king reviewed in his mind and made a good statement before Saardula."'

'"Even if Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas come to wage war with me and even if I have threats from all worlds, I will not give away Sita."'

'Glorious Ravana having spoken like that, again said (to Saardula), "You moved about in the army (camp) there. Tell me who among the monkeys are warriors?"'

'"Gentle Saardula! Of those who are difficult to encounter, what is their description? Who are the powerful ones among them? Whose sons and grandsons, are they? You may speak."'

'"Likewise knowing their strengths and weaknesses from you I wish to know what to do. It is essential to know their numbers and strength before the war."'

'"When Ravana had spoken that way, good spy Saardula proceeded to tell these words in the presence of Ravana."'

'"Certainly, king Sugriva, the son of Rksharaja\'s, is difficult to be conquered in battle. Here is the son of Gadgada, famously called as Jambavan."'

'Another son of Gadgada is Dhumra. One who killed many Rakshasas is Hanuman, the son of Kesari, who is the son of Brhaspati.'

'"O king! Here is a heroic and righteous Sushena, the son of the Lord of death (Yamadharma). Here is Dadhimukha son of noble moon."'

'"Vanaras Sumukha, Durmukha and Vegadarsi are surely created by Brahma in the Vanara form of DeathGod."'

'"The firegod\'s son indeed is the army chief known as Nila, and here is windgod\'s son widely known as Hanuman."'

'"The indomitable and powerful young Angada is the grandson of Indra, the strong Mainda and Dwivida are both the twin sons of Ashwini Devas, Gaja, Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sarabha and Gandhamadana are the five sons of Yama, the god of death. There are ten crores of heroic and prosperous Vanaras desiring to wage war who are the sons of gods. It is not possible to speak of the remaining ones", said Saardula to Ravana."'

'"That young one whose build is like a lion is Dasaratha\'s son who slayed Dushana, even Khara, like wise Trisira."'

'"Viradha and even Kabhanda who was like the Lord of death were killed by Rama. Perhaps there is none equal to Rama in valour in this world."'

'"It is not even possible to recount the virtues of Rama who killed all the Rakshasas approaching Janasthana."'

'"Here is righteous Lakshmana, who is like a bull (foremost) resembling a proud elephant. Even Indra will not be alive with in the range of his arrows when he strikes."'

'"Here are Swetha and Jyothirmukha sons of Sun god Hemakuta another son of Varuna Nala the foremost among the monkey heroes is the valiant son of Vishwakarma and Durdhara of swift action, the son of Vasu."'

'"Here is your brother Vibheeshana the jewel among Rakshasas, who remains as a wellwisher of Rama and has received the city of Lanka (to whom Rama has offered Lanka)."'

'"I have described to you everything about the Vanara strength stationed on Suvela mountain. You may decide the rest of the task to be done."', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the thirtieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'There upon the spies described the unshakeable army of Raghava staying at Suvela mountain, to the king of Lanka.'

'Having heard from the spies that Rama has come with mighty force, Ravana got perturbed and said to the ministers.'

'"The time has come for us to call for all the rakshasas and ministers immediately and assemble (said Ravana)."'

'Having been ordered (by Ravana) that way, the ministers along with Rakshasas instantly reached and he started to think with them.'

'Thereafter, thinking about what is appropriate to do, unassailable Ravana dispensed his ministers and entered his own residence.'

'Then Ravana of extraordinary skills sent for Vidyujihvam, a learned one in conjuring tricks and went from there to Mythili.'

'Rakshasa king Ravana said to Vidyujihvam who knew conjuring tricks, "We will cheat Sita, daughter of Janaka by a trick."'

'"O Night ranger! You make an illusory head of Raghava and come and stand at me holding an arrow with great bow."'

'When the Rakshasa king had spoken that way to Vidyujihvam, he said, "Be it so." Pleased with the dexterous production of Vidyujihvam, Ravana presented to him a beautiful ornament.'

'Eager to have a look at Sita, the mighty king of Rakshasas entered Asoka grove.'

'Thereafter, the younger brother of Kubera (Ravana) saw sad Sita, who did not deserve that piteous condition, who had been reduced to sorrowful state, seated on the ground in Asoka grove, with her head bent down filled with sorrow contemplating on her husband alone.'

'While she was guarded by dreadful Rakshasa women surrounding her closely, Ravana went near her happily and saw her. He addressed Sita praising her.'

'"O Auspicious one! However, much I have requested you, you did not care for me seeking your husband. Raghava, who killed Khara, has been killed in war."'

'"O Sita! All your roots have been crushed by me. Give up your vanity. By your own accord, you become my wife."'

'"O Foolish one! Give up these thoughts from your mind. What will you do with your deceased husband? O auspicious one! You are the queen of all my wives."'

'"O woman of less merit! You are one who has given up all worldly actions. Stupid one! You pretend as if you know everything. O Sita! Hear about your husband \'s death like that of Vrthasura."'

'"Raghava led by the huge army force of the Vanara king has arrived on the seashore."'

'And when the Sun moved towards the west, Rama encamped on the northern shore of the sea with a huge army to strike.'

'After having walked all the way they slept well and when they were sleeping at midnight, we found out all about them by sending prime spies.'

'"There in that camp Lakshmana and Rama are killed by my powerful army led by Prahastha at night."'

'Again, and again lifting spears, iron bars, javelins, huge staffs, sparkling maces, shining iron mallets and clubs, lances and strong Musalas, the Rakshasas hurled at Vanaras.'

'"There after the head of Rama, who was sleeping, was severed by Prahastha, skilled at striking, with a big sword without any feeling of attachment."'

'"When Vibheeshana rose up he was caught by chance. Lakshmana and Vanaras fled in all directions."'

'"O Sita! Vanara Lord Sugriva with his neck broken, Hanuman with chin broken were killed by Rakshasas and are lying down fallen on the ground."'

'And while Jambavan was rising on his knees, he was struck by many iron bars in comb at and had fallen down like a tree.'

'"Mainda and Dwivida of huge bodies, who are slayers of enemies, the bulls among Vanaras are breathing hard, and bathed in blood roaring, having been cutin the middle of their body."'

'"Panasa is lying down on earth like jackfruit. Darimukha is lying down shattered by many arrows. Brilliant Kumuda too is torn off and silently lying down."'

'"By the many arrows of Rakshasas reaching towards Angada, he lies down chopped up and destroyed, with his armlets dropped down throwing up blood."'

'"There, some of the sleeping Vanaras were crushed by elephants, so also, just as by the speed of wind the clouds are crushed the Vanaras are crushed to death."'

'"Some were followed behind as they were speeding like lions and mighty elephants afflicted and frightened, struck by Rakshasas."'

'"While a few Vanaras dived into the sea, some took refuge in the sky. Resorting to their natural way the Bears climbed the trees."'

'"Many fierceeyed Rakshasas killed several Vanaras on the shore of the ocean, in the mountains and woods."'

'"In that way the army of your husband has been killed by Rakshasa army and his decayed head drenched in blood covered with dust has been brought."'

'Then Ravana, the highly unassailable king of Rakshasas spoke these words to the hearing of Sita.'

'"Bring that Rakshasa, Vidyujihvam of cruel deeds who brought Rama\'s head from the battlefield."'

'Then holding the head along with the bow, Vidyujihvam bowed his head down in salutation and stood in front of Ravana.'

'Then the king, Ravana spoke to Vidyujihvam, the Rakshasa with extended tongue, who stood close by.'

"At once place the head of Dasaratha's son before that piteous woman. Let her see the ultimate status attained by her husband at the end (said Ravana)."

'Having spoken immediately placed the head of Rama that was pleasing to see, by the side of Sita and went away.'

'Thus addressed Ravana casting down the bright great bow that is famous in the three worlds.'

'"Prahastha has brought this bow duly tied with the string after killing human Rama in the night."'

"On seeing the esteemed Rama's head and bow, remembering the description made by Hanuman about the friendship with Sugriva thinking of the eyes, complexion of the face, the hair, and curls of her husband at the end Sita recognized the auspicious Chudamani. Identifying all those marks to be like Rama's she felt very sad and cried like a deer and abused Kaikeyi."

"On seeing the esteemed Rama's head and bow, remembering the description made by Hanuman about the friendship with Sugriva thinking of the eyes, complexion of the face, the hair, and curls of her husband at the end Sita recognized the auspicious Chudamani. Identifying all those marks to be like Rama's she felt very sad and cried like a deer and abused Kaikeyi."

'"O Kaikeyi! Your desire is fulfilled with the killing of the delight of the race. You, who are given to creating quarrel have ruined the race."'

'"Kaikeyi, you have given bark robes to prince Rama and sent him to the forest with me. What harm has he done for you? Thinking of this again and again Sita cried."'

'That miserable young, Vaidehi, having said so, fell on the ground trembling like a cut off banana plant.'

'Broadeyed Sita, regaining her consciousness after a while, sat close to the head of Rama and lamented.'

'"O mightyarmed one! Alas you are killed while following heroic vow. I live to see you in the last state of your life, widowed. I am done."'

'"O Rama, you are faithful to your vows, a noble one! It is said that because of a woman\'s faults, the husband will die. It is not even so as you died in front of a virtuous woman of good conduct."'

'"I am in grief and filled with an ocean of sorrow. You who have come to save me and are also killed."'

'"O Raghava! Even my motherinlaw Kausalya is separated from her dear son just as cow is separated from calf."'

'"O Raghava of incomprehensible valour! the words predicted by astrologers that your life is long is falsified. Your life has been short."'

'"Or else, even the wisdom of a learned one is diffused and lost perhaps! the effect of time which is the cause of all living beings has caused this."'

'"You are the knower of all sastras, and capable of warding off all calamities. How did death have a chance to meet you and overtake?"'

'"O lotuseyed Rama! After you have lost contact with me, the most horrible cruel night has killed you cutting you off from me."'

'"O mightyarmed one! A bull among men and a noble one, you are embracing the earth as though it is your beloved and sleeping leaving me in the sky."'

'"O Hero! This bow that was decorated with gold was always worshipped with sandal and flowers diligently by you and me with utmost devotion."'

'"O Sinless one! Surely you have reached heaven where your father, my fatherinlaw Dasaratha and your grandfathers have reached."'

'"In heaven, you will be seeing luminaries of the sky who are dear, who have done great deeds and earned merit and the royal sages of your own race."'

'"O King! I have come to you while I was young. I am your companion and wife also. Why are you not seeing me? Why are you not talking to me?"'

'"O Kakutstha! while you held my hand (at the time of marriage) you promised that you will be with me and likewise promised to take me, a (wretched one) with you to the other world. Remembering that I am sad."'

'"O Jewel among those who attained good state! Why have you gone abandoning me dear? To which world have you gone from here? I am pained by your deserting me."'

'"This body which used to be decorated by me with auspicious items, with great respect is dragged by cruel animals."'

'"Why are you, who performed all kinds of sacrificial rituals of fire with all offerings deserve sanctification without doing fire sacrifice?"'

'"Seeing only Lakshmana returning, of the three exiled, Kausalya will be immersed in grief (will ask)."'

'"When she questions, he may tell that you and your army were killed by the army of friends at night."'

'"Raghava! Hearing that you were killed while asleep and I was taken to the home of Rakshasas, Kausalya will not be able to survive with a broken heart."'

'"On account of an undeserving one, Rama, the son of the emperor, a valiant one who does not deserve to be killed, after having crossed the ocean is killed by a footprint of a cow(easily)."'

'"In ignorance as an obloquy of his race, the noble son of Dasaratha married me. For such Rama\'s wife turned out to be his death."'

'"Undoubtedly I may have obstructed a supreme offering (such as offering a girl in marriage) in some other (previous) life. So now I am pained even though I am the wife of one who is kind to all."'

'"O Ravana! You may quickly join me with my husband as it will be highly auspicious for the wife to join the husband."'

'"O Ravana! Join my head with his and my body with his body. I will follow him in the same way."'

'Burning in sorrow, the broad eyed Sita gazing at the head of her husband and the bow again and again lamented.'

'While Sita was wailing in that manner, as said earlier, the Rakshasa guarding her approached the king and offered salutations with both hands.'

'The Rakshasa (guard) greeted the king saying, "Let you be victorious!" and announced reverentially, "Prahastha, the army chief has arrived."'

'"O Lord! Accompanied by all ministers Prahastha is waiting and sends me desiring to see you."'

'"O great king, endowed with forgiveness and royalty! there is a little urgent work. Undoubtedly, they are waiting to see you please."'

'On hearing the submission of the rakshasa, the tenheaded king left the Asoka grove to see the ministers.'

"Having known all about Rama's prowess, Ravana and ministers entered the assembly to think carefully about the task to be carried out and how to do it."

'As soon as Ravana departed, that head and the excellent bow vanished from there.'

'The king of Rakshasas and the ministers of terrific valour then thought about the course of action to be taken against Rama and decided.'

'The Rakshasa king who resembled the god of death spoke to the heads of army force and wellwishers who stood close by.'

'"Break forth by beating the drums with powerful drumsticks calling the army to assemble without telling the reason."'

"Then the attendants collected the great powerful army saying, 'so be it', to Ravana who was desirous of war.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्दकाण्डेद्वात्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the thirty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Then seeing Sita in distraught, a Rakshasi by name Saarana who was very dear and friendly with Vaidehi approached her.'

'Then Saarana of sweet expression, comforted Sita who was put off and was extremely sorrowful because of the Rakshasa king.'

'Most compassionate Saarana, determined to protect was friendly with Sita while she was ordered for protecting her by Ravana.'

'Saarana saw her friend Sita, who had lost consciousness, fully covered by dust by rolling on the dirty ground like a female horse.'

'Saarana consoled Vaidehi of noble vows in a friendly way and encouraged her to recover saying, "Let there be no pain at heart."'

'"O Broadeyed friend! You are constantly under fear (timid). Give up fear of Ravana, I have overheard all that you have spoken to Ravana and his reply by hiding in a secret place out of my affection, without caring for my life."'

'"O Mythili! I know all about why the king of Rakshasas returned back agitated."'

'"Rama is a knower of his Self. It is not possible to kill him while he is asleep. Nay death is not possible for he is a tiger among men."'

'"Vanaras are fighting with trees and are not capable of being killed. Just as the gods are protected by their Lord Indra, Vanaras are protected by Rama. It is not feasible to kill them."'

'"O Sita! One who is endowed with long rounded arms and broad chest, a valorous one, a glorious wielder of bow and powerful Rama along with his brother Lakshmana, is always a protector of himself and all surrounding him. He is a knower of sastras of propriety. Raghava is majestic with inconceivable courage and a destroyer of foes. He will not be killed."'

'"On account of his perverse thought and being inimical to all beings Ravana a tricker has attempted a trick at you in anger."'

'"Your sorrow has gone. All auspiciousness awaits you. Surely you will attain good fortune (Lakshmi). You listen to my happy and pleasant news."'

'"Rama accompanied by Vanara army has crossed the ocean and reached the southern shore of the ocean."'

'"Rama, a fully accomplished soul accompanied by Lakshmana together with army stands protected by the army and is stationed on the seashore."'

'"These swift footed Rakshasas sent by the king brought the news of Rama crossing the sea."'

'"O Broadeyed Sita! On hearing the news (of Rama crossing) Rakshasa king is holding consultation with ministers about what to do."'

'While Saarana was speaking to Sita, frightening sounds of the army making all kinds of attempts were heard.'

'On hearing the loud sounds of army maces, rods, and drums, Saarana looked at Sita and spoke these sweet words.'

'"O Timid Sita! Listen to the deep penetrating sounds of drums like the rumbling of rain clouds signifying the preparations of the army."'

'"Elephants in rut are being decorated, charioteers are getting ready for war in thousands and discharging darts from hands and laughing loudly."'

'"See the weird appearance of footsoldiers collected here and therein groups prepared to go. The royal path is filled with choking sounds of the troops moving fast, like an ocean filled with streams of water. It is strange."'

'"Look at the sheen of weapons, the leather shields, spreading forth different pleasing colours, the brightness of which resembles the burning of forest fire arisen and spread in summer. And here are chariots, horses and elephants decked with ornaments following Ravana, as well as the powerful Rakshasa army full of joy."'

'"Listen to the bustle of noise of the Rakshasas lifting the weapons, ringing of the bells (of elephants), and rattling of chariots, and neighing of horses. Listen to the flourish of the trumpets. The happy Rakshasas are making tumultuous noise causing horripilation."'

'"Your fire of anger will be gone. Your husband, the lotuspetal eyed Rama whose prowess is inconceivable like that of Indra who vanquished Daityas will come and kill Ravana and win you back."'

'"Your husband accompanied by Lakshmana will exhibit his valour against Rakshasas just as Indra did against enemies accompanied by Vishnu (descended as his younger brother)."'

'"When the enemy is killed, and your objective is accomplished, I shall behold you mounted on the lap of Rama."'

'"Virtuous Sita! Hugged by your broad chested Rama, you will shed tears of joy on his bosom."'

'"O Sita! God like lady! Mighty Rama will soon release your single plait hanging up to hind part for many months before."'

'"God like Lady! Beholding the face of Sri Rama whose face is like a just risen full moon, you will cast off tears of sorrow just as a female snake sets its slough free."'

'"O divine Mythili! Killing Ravana in war before long, your beloved who deserves to be happy will be happy in the company of his beloved."'

'"Just as the earth becomes green with crops blessed with good monsoon, so also you will become joyful by seeing the great soul Rama\'s heroism."'

"Thus, Sita's agony was put off by Saarana's consoling words and Sita was glad just as the parched earth was delighted with shower of rain."

'Then Saarana who knew the right time to do so, wishing the welfare of her dear friend Sita and desirous of doing anything for her smiled before she started speaking.'

'"Darkeyed Sita! I am eager to go (to Rama\'s presence) and communicate your welfare and message. I can return back hidden (from Ravana\'s view)."'

'"While I fly through the sky without any support, either the wind god or even Garuda will not be capable of following my movement."'

"When Saarana was telling Sita in that way, Sita's face which was earlier filled with tears became pleasant and she spoke again."

'"You are capable of flying through the sky or even going to the underworld. For my sake you will do what cannot be done also and that it is your bounden duty, is also known to me."'

'"In my opinion, your duty for me is to go and find out what Ravana is doing now, if you are firmly resolved."'

'"Ravana has the power of conjuring tricks, makes enemies cry. He is cruel, evil minded and deluding me as though he has drunk liquor."'

'"He, that Ravana makes even the frightful Rakshasa care takers threaten me and reproach me repeatedly every day."'

'"I am perturbed and doubtful (of my life). My mind is not at ease. Even though I am in Ashoka Grove I am disturbed."'

'"Indeed, please tell me certainly in toot, whatever decision that enemy takes and everything. Be kind to me and tell."'

"Saarana who speaks sweetly, kept wiping Sita's face covered with tears gently and replied in this manner."

'"Janaki! If you think so, I shall go to Ravana secretly and find out his intention and return back."'

"Having said so to Sita, she (Saarana) moved closer (to Ravana) and heard Ravana's conversation with his ministers."

'Having heard and known the intention of evilminded Ravana, she (Saarana) quickly reached the beautiful Ashoka grove.'

"On entering the Ashoka grove, she saw the daughter of Janaka eagerly waiting for her every moment, looking like Lord Vishnu's wife Lakshmi, who lost her lotus seat."

'On seeing the kind Saarana returning, Sita was very glad. She embraced her and offered a seat herself.'

'"Seated here happily reveals to me truly that cruel and evil minded Ravana\'s intention."'

'"Let Mythili be given back to the ruler of the people (Rama) offering good hospitality. The (killing of fourteen thousand Rakshasas) amazing performance at Janasthana by Rama should serve as sufficient proof to you (of the consequences)."'

'"Crossing the ocean, reaching Lanka, seeing Sita and killing Rakshasas in comb at was done by Hanuman. Which man can do this on earth?"'

'"Even though his mother and aged minister counselled Ravana, he is like a miser holding on treasure not inclined to set you free."'

'"O Mythili! Ravana is not interested in liberating you unless he goes to the other world in combat. (It can\'t happen when he is alive) This is certain. There is no doubt about this."'

'"This thought has come to him only to cause him death. Because of impending death, he is very steady in his mind. This Ravana will not be able to liberate you before his death and of the Rakshasas."'

'"Rama will kill Ravana in war with his sharp arrows and take you back to Ayodhya, O darkeyed lady!"'

'In the meantime (while Saarana was telling Sita) the sounds of drums and conchs combined with the clamour of Vanara troops was heard and it was as though the surface of the earth was shaking.'

"On hearing the sounds of Vanara troops, the Rakshasas present in Lanka became dull, overcome by depression, thinking that because of Ravana's mistakes they could not see any good prospects for them.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुस्त्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the thirty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by Valmiki.'

'The mighty armed Rama, the conqueror of enemy cities, Raghava marched forth with the noise of the blowing of conches and the sounds of drums.'

'Ravana, the Lord of Rakshasas, looked at his ministers on hearing the sounds and reflecting for a moment.'

'Thereafter the mighty Lord of Rakshasas, a cruel one, a scourge of the world addressed the assembly of his ministers and spoke abusing them.'

'"You have told me about the valour of Hanuman the messenger of Rama and his prowess in crossing the ocean which I heard just now."'

'"Even though you are truly valorous in war, on knowing Rama\'s prowess, you are standing mute looking at each other. I know that."'

"Then, Malyavan the maternal grandfather of Ravana, a very wise Rakshasa indeed said this on hearing Ravana's statement."

'"O king! Whoever is well versed in all the fourteen sciences and is a follower of justice, he alone wins over enemies and rules the kingdom for long."'

'"Continuing to act in that way in course of time a king who encounters his enemies and expands his own side, enjoys great sovereignty."'

'"When a king is losing strength, he should join hand s with the enemy who is equal to him. He should not disrespect the enemy but quit his hostility and join him (if the enemy is more powerful)."'

'"O Ravana! Joining with that Rama is agreeable to me. Let that Sita for whose sake you have been attacked be restored to him."'

'All the celestial sages and Gandharvas are wishing him victory. Therefore, do not have enmity. Making an alliance with him is desirable for you.'

'"The divine Brahma, the grandfather of the universe created two orders, deities and devils. They took the refuge of virtues and vices respectively."'

'"The great souls were towards righteousness and Rakshasas took the side of unrighteousness."'

'"When moral merit destroys unrighteousness, it is called Krtayuga. So also, when virtue gets eclipsed by unrighteousness, it is called Kaliyuga."'

'"While you were ranging in all the worlds, you gave up righteousness and embraced unrighteousness. Therefore, the enemy who is righteous is stronger than you."'

'"You are nourishing unrighteousness mistakenly. Therefore, it is going to swallow us. It has become the cause for the divine celestial side to become powerful."'

'"Being engaged in matters of sense pleasures you have created great agitation(disturbance) in the minds of the seers (engaged in penance) who resemble gods of burning fire."'

'"Their power is difficult to overcome as they are pure souls and blazing like fire by their austerity. They follow virtues faithfully intending to acquire merit like brahmanas. They are standing firmly curbing their senses doing sacrifices offering oblations into sacrificial fires following tradition. Having subdued the Rakshasas, they are continuing to recite Vedas and on hearing Vedas the Rakshasas are running away in different directions like the rain cloud is scattered in the hot season."'

'"By the spread of smoke in different directions from the sacrificial fires from the oblations offered by the seers the brilliance of the Rakshasas is taken away."'

'"The intense austerities performed by the sages in different regions determined firmly are tormenting the Rakshasas."'

'"You have secured boons of immunity against death at the hand s of strong and mighty and powerful valour, like gods, Danavas, Yakshas and human beings. The Vanaras, Bears and monkeys with dark faces are coming here now thundering."'

'"Beholding different dreadful ones rising up in various directions, I foresee destruction of all Rakshasas."'

'"Formidable clouds are emitting hot and most frightening thunder drenched by rain of blood all over Lanka."'

'"With tear drops falling from the eyes of weeping horses and elephants (carrying army) they are discoloured by dust and are not shining like before."'

'"Wicked jackals and vultures are entering deep into Lanka and gathering. They are crying most frightfully."'

'"Women of dark colour like coal with yellow teeth are speaking unpleasant things standing before us in dreams laughing heartily."'

'"In the houses, food offerings made for gods are eaten by dogs, donkeys are procreating cows and rats of mongoose."'

'"Cats are having the company of (mating) Leopards, pigs are mating with dogs, Kinneras with Rakshasas as well as human beings also."'

'"The white and redfooted doves are moving about impelled by time spirit boding destruction of Rakshasas."'

'"Minas living in households grappling with bellicose birds in delight are falling down dead."'

'All birds and animals are making hostile noise. Time is always coming in a dreadful and monstrous blackish form with a shaved head, morning, and evening. Considering all these sinister portents are making an appearance at all households.'

'Rama is Lord Vishnu in human form endowed with fortitude and prowess. One who has constructed an amazing bridge on the ocean is not just a human being. O Ravana! Align with the ruler of men, Sri Rama. After careful thinking and determining correctly, do what is good.'

"The tenheaded Ravana, having fallen under the sway of death could not tolerate Malyavatha's words of advice."

'Then Ravana who had come under the influence of anger, knitting the brows of his face rolling his eyes said to Malyavan.'

'"Harsh and not wellmeaning words have been uttered by you taking the enemy\'s side. I will not listen to what you said earlier."'

'"For what reason do you say that a wretched human being, alone, forsaken by a father who has taken asylum in the forest, who is taking the help of vanaras is capable?"'

'"The Lord of Rakshasas is a terror to all including the Devas and am endowed with all kinds of prowess and efficiency. Why do you think I am deficient?"'

'"I suspect that out of hatred towards me, you are speaking such harsh words to a hero encouraged by the enemy."'

'"Which person who has learned the truth of sastras will address such harsh words to one in power without instigation?"'

'"Sita who is like Lakshmi without the lotus has been brought from the forest. Why would I return her for the fear of Rama?"'

'"Indeed, in a short while crores of Vanaras, Sugriva and also Lakshmana and Raghava will be killed by me. Oh!"'

'As even gods will not with stand Ravana in war, of whom Ravana will be afraid of in a duel.'

'"I would break my head into two also but not bend my head to anyone. It is my weakness. It is hard to overcome nature."'

'"Rama has constructed a bridge by chance and because of that you are fearing what wonder is there in it?"'

'"Rama having crossed the sea with his Vanara army will not go back with life. It is true."'

'When Ravana was abashed and speaking in that way realizing that he is angry, Malyavan did not reply feeling shy.'

'Malyavan offered blessings to the king for success in accordance with tradition left to his house.'

'Ravana then held discussions with his companions and ministers and made unequalled arrangements for (safety of) Lanka.'

'Ravana posted Prahastha surrounded by many Rakshasas at the east gate, and the Rakshasas of great prowess, Mahaparsva and Mahodara at the southern gate, and like that Mahamaya and Indrajith, his own son at the western gate.'

'Ravana posted Suka and Sarana at the north gate of Lanka and himself reached there and told the ministers that he would be there.'

'In the middle of the city, he placed Virupaksha, a Rakshasa endowed with extraordinary strength and many more Rakshasas.'

'The best of Rakshasas under the sway of destiny, having been ordered in that way in Lanka, Ravana felt as though he had accomplished the task.'

'There after making arrangements adequately for the protection of Lanka, taking leave of ministers who offered blessings for his prosperity and uttered words of benediction for his success Ravana entered the inner chambers of the palace.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषटित्रंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the thirty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"Sugriva the king of men and monkeys, Hanuman the son of wind god, Jambavan the king of Bears, Vibheeshana, Vali's son Angada, Sarabha, accompanied by his kin Sushena, Mainda, Dwivida, Gaja, Gavaksha, Kumuda, the wise Nala and Panasa arrived at the enemy city and collected together thought like this."

"Sugriva the king of men and monkeys, Hanuman the son of wind god, Jambavan the king of Bears, Vibheeshana, Vali's son Angada, Sarabha, accompanied by his kin Sushena, Mainda, Dwivida, Gaja, Gavaksha, Kumuda, the wise Nala and Panasa arrived at the enemy city and collected together thought like this."

'"This Lanka city ruled by Ravana is seen. It appears that this city is unconquerable to Devas, demons and Gandharvas also by the immortals."'

'"Rakshasa king Ravana is ever present here. Prepare yourself to achieve success in the mission and determine your duty."'

"While they were speaking like that to one another, Ravana's brother Vibheeshana spoke courteously, words full of meaning."

'"My ministers Anala, Sarabha, Sampathi and also Praghasa went to Lanka and saw it and returned."'

'All of them assumed the form of birds and went deep into Lanka, saw the enemy strength and arrangements made by the enemy and turned up.'

'"Rama! Alas, they told me everything of the way evil minded Ravana\'s army is organized as it is. Listen to me."'

'"Powerful Prahasta stands at east gate with army, Mahaparsva and Mahodara of great valour are at the south gate."'

'"Ravana\'s own son, Indrajith stands at the west gate surrounded by numerous Rakshasas collected together wielding sharp swords, bows, spears, arrows and darts and many kinds of weapons."'

'"Ravana himself stands at the north gate of Lanka, highly agitated surrounded by many thousands of Rakshasas wielding weapons."'

'"Virupaksha stands in the middle of Lanka wielding spears, swords, bows and arrows accompanied by mighty army."'

'All our ministers immediately returned back after keenly observing the city of Lanka in this way.'

'"Elephant army of ten thousand, similarly ten thousand charioteers, horse riders in twenty thousand, more than a crore foot soldiers, mighty strong and valiant warriors, night ranger\'s beloved to Ravana, the king of Rakshasas were staying close and serving."'

'"O! Lord of men! For the sake of assisting one Rakshasa in war ten lakhs of Rakshasas are staying at his service."'

'Mighty armed Vibheeshana revealed to Rama all the information that was told to him by ministers.'

'Again, Vibheeshana, the prosperous brother of Ravana, spoke to Rama everything about Lanka made known to him by the ministers. Vibheeshana looking at the lotus petal eyed Rama, intending to please Rama, spoke.'

'"Rama! Earlier when Ravana launched an offensive battle against Kubera, sixty thousand Rakshasas who were equal to him in valour, brilliance, courage, and with respect sallied forth the proud, the evil minded Ravana."'

'"Here, in this case do not be angry. I am telling out of my duty and not out of indignation or to cause anger or fear in you. You are capable of resisting even Devatas."'

'"You also have these Vanara armies surrounded by four kinds of army, elephants, chariots, cavalry and foot soldiers."'

"When Ravana's younger brother spoke in that way Raghava instructed the army to attack the enemy."

'"Let the Vanara leader Neela along with Vanaras stay at the east gate of Lanka and give fight to Prahasta."'

'"Let Vali\'s son the mighty and powerful Angada along with army crush Mahaparsva and Mahodara at the south gate."'

'"Let Hanuman, the wind god\'s son of unimaginable prowess, enter the west gate along with numerous Vanaras and press against the enemy."'

'"That Ravana who is harming Daityas and Danavas, and great souls following wicked practices and armed by the boons is oppressing all people wandering all over. I, with Lakshmana, have determined to persecute and kill him and force my entry to the north gate."'

'"Mighty strong Sugriva, valorous Jambavan, the ruler of Vanaras and Vibheeshana, brother of Ravana will remain at the middle of Lanka and fight."'

'"In the battle like this at present Vanaras should not be in the semblance of humans. Let this be our sign."'

'"To know our own people the Vanaras are the sign of recognition Chivalrous Lakshmana, my brother, similarly five of us and our friend Vibheeshana, these seven people alone will wage war in human form."'

'Wise Rama having spoken like that to Vibheeshana for accomplishing the task, looking at the beauty of Suvela mountain slopes, climbed up and went.'

'Rama, the well wisher of Lakshmana climbing up the Suvela mountain thought in his mind and thus spoke to Sugriva and the righteous, affectionate Vibheeshana, a counsellor, knower of right action and facts of Lanka, and a respectable enemy.'

'Rama, the well wisher of Lakshmana climbing up the Suvela mountain thought in his mind and thus spoke to Sugriva and the righteous, affectionate Vibheeshana, a counsellor, knower of right action and facts of Lanka, and a respectable enemy.'

'"We shall all climb up this Suvela mountain captivating with hundreds of minerals and remain there tonight."'

'"We shall see Lanka the abode of Rakshasa by whom, who is evil minded as he is to face death, has stolen my consort not knowing, who turned away from righteous duty not knowing the race with lowly Rakshasa mentality, who is immoral."'

'"My wrath is aroused by the mention of the name of lowly Rakshasa. Because of his mistakes all Rakshasas are to be exterminated now."'

'"Only one has done that sin and fallen into the noose of death. Because of one Rakshasa\'s mistake the race will perish."'

'Talking about Ravana in that manner, Rama climbed the captivating slopes of Suvela to rest there.'

'Heroic and alert Lakshmana also holding his great bow, followed. His ministers and Vibheeshana and Sugriva also followed him up.'

'Hanuman, Angada, Neela, Mainda, Dwivida, Gandhamadana, Panasa, Kumuda, Hara. Rambhu, Jambhavan, Sushena, intelligent Rshaba, highly energetic Durmukha and Satavali and similarly swift footed Vanaras, mountain rangers and those who can move at wind speed, all of them in hundreds ascended the Suvela mountain following Rama.'

'All of them in no time ascended the mountain peak and saw the city of Lanka which was as if clinging closely to the sky and hanging.'

'The vanara heroes witnessed beautiful gateways, captivating boundaries of auspicious Lanka filled all over with rakshasas.'

'The best of vanaras saw dark coloured rakshasas who stood like another boundary in a row.'

'All the vanaras saw the rakshasas eager for war, and as Rama stood looking at them many kinds of clamours were heard.'

'Thereafter the Sun had set in, and twilight reddened. Full moon started shining as night had set in.'

'Thereafter, Rama, the leader of Vanara troops happily rested on Suvela peak after Vibheeshana and Lakshmana duly offered their prayers.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टात्रिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the thirty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'The heroic leader of the monkeys kept awake that night on the Suvela and saw forests and gardens there in Lanka.'

'They were amazed to see the even terrain, beautiful and expansive, long, and continuous sanctuary lovely to look at being a feast to the eyes.'

'Thickly covered with trees like Champaka, Asoka, Punnaga, Sala, Tala, Samala and Tamala trees concealing the woods, surrounded with Nagamala trees all over  and Hintala, Arjuna and Neepa in full bloom, Saptaparni, Tilaka, Karnakara and Patala trees with crests laden with flowers, intertwined with creepers and wonderful variety of flowers trees with tender red leaves as if clothe d in red, flowers of diverse kind and similarly colourful Neela and Sadala as king of forest, it was shining like Amaravathi, capital of Indra.'

'Having reached there where trees bore fragrance, very beautiful flowers and fruits seemed as though humans were wearing ornaments.'

'Appearing like the chaitra chariot of Kubera, Nandana garden of Indra, green in all seasons filled with bees, the garden was a wonderful delight.'

'The Vanaras heard the singing of cuckoos, dancing of peacocks, crying of gallinules, lapwings and herons from the gardens abounding in cascades.'

'There after the rejoiced heroic Vanaras who can change their form at will happily entered the woods and gardens inhabited by birds in heat full of emotion, trees covered with cuckoos, and wandering bees, rendered noisy by birds, resounded with the singing of large black bees and bees going around clinging to trees, mingled with sounds of various birds and noise of cries of cranes.'

'Then the Vanaras of extraordinary energy, were enjoying the breeze redolent with the fragrance of flowers as they were entering, and the wind blew.'

'Some other monkey heroes permitted by Sugriva went to Lanka decorated with flags.'

'Other monkeys capable of roaring went into Lanka, spreading out terrifying the birds, dispiriting the deer and elephants by noise.'

'Those Vanaras endowed with speed went trampling down on the ground with force, the dust under their feet rose to the sky in a fraction of a second.'

'Alarmed by that sound the Bears, lions, pigs, elephants, buffaloes were frightened and went in all the ten directions.'

'Trikuta peak was fully covered with flowers, sparkled with gold, spread over a hundred yojanas, beautiful to look at, splendid and smooth. It is difficult even for birds to reach, for sages even in thought and difficult to access by any physical action. It is praiseworthy as if touching the sky alone.'

'Lanka ruled by Ravana was a hundred yojanas in breadth and thirty yojanas in length was seen.'

'The city of Lanka looked charming with tall towers resembling white cluster of clouds fortified with gold and silver.'

'The tall buildings decorated beautifully resembled air planes and were shining like heavy rainy clouds exposed to the sun. The building in the centre resembled the abode of Vishnu.'

"In that city, which was always protected fully by a hundred Rakshasas, there was a palace with thousand pillars, which looked like peak of mount Kailas, and was as though it was scraping the sky and it as like an ornament of Lanka, the city of Rakshasa's Lord."

'Prosperous Rama, brother of Lakshmana along with Vanaras saw different kinds of forests, mountains filled with different kinds of minerals, delightful gardens endowed with different varieties of flowers, charming birds singing happily, frequented by a variety of deer, attended by Rakshasas. The city was blooming with prosperity.'

"Valiant brother of Lakshmana wondered seeing the city filled with great palaces, distinct like Lord Indra's city."

'Accompanied by huge Vanara army, Rama saw in the city of Lanka rows of buildingspalaces, adorned with gems, gates fitted with huge machines for war and large army of Ravana.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the thirty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Rama accompanied by Vanara troop and Sugriva, ascended the peak of Suvela mountain spread over yojanas.'

'Remaining there for a short while, Rama observed the view of Lanka in all directions. He saw Lanka built on the charming peak of Trikuta strongly by Vishwakarma, endowed with delightful groves.'

"From there Rama saw on the peak of the tower the Rakshasa king, who is difficult to approach. He was fanned by white whisks on both sides, graced with triumphal parasol, decorated his body with red sandal paste, adorned in redcoloured ornaments, resembling dark clouds, attired in red like the hare's blood, embroidered with golden thread, with scars on his chest caused by indentations made by the tusks of Airavata the elephant of Indra, looked like a mass of cloud covered by sunshine at dusk."

'Looking at the sight of Raghava seeing Rakshasa king, Sugriva the king of Vanaras got up instantly rashly.'

'Provoked by anger, courageous and strong Sugriva rose up impelled by impetuosity and flew to the peak of the tower.'

'For a moment he stood looking at the ogre fearlessly in his mind and treating him like straw spoke harsh words.'

'"O Rakshasa! I am a friend and servant of the king of kings, ruler of the world. By his power I will not leave you!", Sugriva said.'

'Having spoken thus, Sugriva got up speedily and flew to the top of the tower (here Ravana was located) held the diadem and pushed it on the ground.'

'Observing Sugriva coming towards him, Ravana said, "When you were not seen by me you had a neck. I will make you neckless."'

'Telling like that that Ravana got up and threw Sugriva by his hand s to the ground. Then Sugriva getting up like a ball fallen pushed Ravana down.'

'Sugriva and Ravana, their bodies sweating all over, bodies coloured red with blood looking like red silk cotton trees, their bodies clinging together interlocked with each other stood motionless. They were fighting with their fists, palms and blows of forearms, hurting each other with nails and carrying out unbearable forms of war.'

'Violently fighting like that aggressively for long, throwing each other down repeatedly, bending and moving their feet in a direction, stood on the fl at area of the peak in the middle portion.'

'Squeezing their bodies of each other they dropped down between the boundary of the peak and the moat. They were gasping heavily for a moment and clung their body to each other jumping.'

'Both pressing their bosom to each other, clung to each other, and fastened themselves in embrace in the comb at having received similar training in war and both endowed with might. At this time, they went on in comb at using several war methods.'

'Both of them resembled a tiger and lion affected by pride, connecting to each other through their shoulders like Lordly elephants, hitting and hurting one another holding one another fell down at once simultaneously.'

'Both of them were holding one another, snubbing each other gradually following many kinds of combat. As both the heroes were well trained in wrestling and fighting, they did not feel tiresome.'

'Both Ravana and Sugriva endowed with mighty arms, were resisting each other, and keeping away one another engaging in comb at for a long time. They kept on moving, going around each other swiftly.'

'Both of them intent on destroying each other were approaching one another and now and then growling like cats for the sake of food.'

"Both Vanara king and Ravana being learned in war craft, went around in circles like ox's urine, stood in different wonderful postures, moved forward and backward horizontally and obliquely to evade movements, hitting, and delivering each other, standing steadily motionless, striking, jumping, assaulting each other coming forward and going away, going backwards jumping from behind, holding hands and folding to resist exhibiting their skill in combat."

'In the meantime, Ravana thought of exhibiting his superiority by jugglery and jumped to the sky. Knowing that Sugriva, the untiring Vanara king assumed the air of victor and rose up to the sky. Baffled Ravana stood thinking Sugriva would come there.'

"Then Sugriva, the Sun god's son, the Lord of Vanara chiefs, who had won fame of winning in battles, victorious exhausting Ravana in comb at flying the extensive sky reached Rama who was amid Vanara army."

'Sugriva the son of the Sun god, having completed the feat, rejoiced by increasing the joy of foremost of Raghus. Then he who is adored by the monkey chiefs entered the army of Vanaras.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fortieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Rama, brother of Lakshmana, seeing the signs of war, embraced Sugriva and spoke these words.'

'"You have done this courageous feat without consulting me. Rulers do not do such actions."'

'"O hero, who is fond of daring actions! To me, to the army and Vibheeshana you created a great doubt by this bold action of yours."'

'"O broad shouldered hero, tamer of foes! Do not do this kind of action. Even if you were harmed a bit, O destroyer of foes, of what use is it to me or even to Sita, Bharata, Satrughna or to Lakshmana or even to my body?"'

'"Mighty Sugriva! You resemble Indra and Varuna in might. Your valour is known to me. I have decided in my mind to kill the sons of Ravana and his relatives in battle, coronate Vibheeshana in Lanka, and hand over the kingdom to Bharata and give up my body."'

'To Rama who was speaking in that manner, Sugriva replied, "Heroic Rama! Seeing that Ravana, who has borne away your consort, and knowing my own strength, how can I tolerate?"'

'Raghava heard the hero Sugriva, applauding him and spoke these words to Lakshmana, who was endowed with prosperity.'

'"Lakshmana! We should occupy a region with cool water and good fruits and plan to divide the army and be ready."'

'"I foresee the terrific destruction of eminent heroes among Bears, monkeys and Rakshasas. I see the danger approaching."'

'"The winds are blowing severely, the earth is quaking in, the mountain peaks are shaking, and the elephants bearing the earth (in the four corners) are falling."'

'"The fierce clouds resembling wild birds are making terrible harsh sounds and rain mixed with drops of blood is showering."'

'"The twilight appears like red sander trees, the burning fire falling from the sun is like a mass of fire and frightening."'

'"The desperate inauspicious sounds of ominous beasts crying pitifully facing the sun are causing great fear."'

'"Like at the time of universal dissolution, the moon is not radiant, being surrounded by black and red halo at night and is tormenting."'

'"Lakshmana! Short dark spot observed in the Sun \'s orbit is inauspicious. moon is surrounded by copper colour and dreary."'

'"Just as the spots on the moon, the stars are also dirty and not visible. It forebodes the end of the universe Lakshmana!"'

'"The crows, hawks and also vultures are joining lowly animals like jackals and making loud noises which is inauspicious and not good."'



'"The land will remain covered by rocks, tridents, swords hurled by the Vanaras and Rakshasas and with flesh and blood."'

'Mighty hero Rama, (the elder brother of Lakshmana) said to Lakshmana in this manner (as described earlier) and descended from the peak of the mountain without delay.'

'Climbing down the mountain, the righteous Rama reviewed in his mind the strength of his army and the enemy which is difficult to assail.'

'Raghava, who is knowledgeable of when to do what, motivated the army of Vanaras and Sugriva and ordered.'

'Surrounded by a large army in front, the broad shouldered Rama proceeded towards Lanka.'

'Then Vibheeshana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan, Nala, Neela in the same way Lakshmana followed.'

'Then the bears, monkeys, covering all over the land went behind Rama.'

'The monkeys who were of the size of elephants capable of warding off the enemy, bore huge grown up trees in their hands and went.'

'In a short while the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana, tamers of foes reached the city of Lanka.'

"Commanded by Rama's words the Vanaras remaining in their positions as ordained, entered the wonderful Lanka, which was decorated with flags, embellished with gardens. The defensive walls and arches of the boundary of Lanka were difficult to access even for Devatas."

'Accompanied by his brother Lakshmana, Rama, armed with bow, blocked the northern gate of Lanka which was like a lofty mountain peak and protected.'

"(Dasaratha's son) Rama who had Lakshmana as follower reached the northern gate protected by Ravana. Just as the ocean is guarded by Varuna, it was guarded by terrific Rakshasas, who were secretly hiding all over like the Rakshasas in the subterranean region with small amounts of numerous armours for protection. It was not possible for anyone other than Rama to enter."

'Rama Saw there, numerous weapons of every kind so also shields for the combatants of war.'

'Neela the commanderinchief of the army of monkeys, a valiant one, also Dwivida, and Mainda reached the east gate and remained there.'

'Angada endowed with great prowess along with Rshaba, Gavaksha, Gaja, and Gavaya reached the south gate.'

'Mighty monkey Hanuman united with heroes Pramati and Praghasa and others protected the west gate.'

'Sugriva chief of all army and best of the monkey army who was equal to Garuda of beautiful wings, endowed with wind speed remained in the middle (of north and west) post.'

'Renowned generals of the Vanara army and thirtysix crores of Vanaras stood there camping.'

'By the command of Rama, Vibheeshana accompanied by Lakshmana posted crores and crores of Vanaras there.'

"Sushena along with Jambavan and a large army of Vanaras were posted in the centre not far from Rama at the west by Rama's order."

'Vanaras who resembled tigers, endowed with sharp teeth joyfully stood there holding trees and peaks of mountain waiting to combat.'

'All had their tails lifted unusually, had their nails and teeth sharp as weapons, some had unnatural face, and all of them had distorted eyes (as in fury).'

'A few of them were having the strength of ten elephants, some had ten times more than others, and a few were endowed with great strength equal to thousand elephants.'

'Few monkeys had strength of an ogha, some had a hundred times more, and the monkey commanders possessed immeasurable strength.'

'There it seemed as if a flight of locusts had gathered, with monkey army gathered there. It was amazing and astonishing.'

'Vanaras settled in such a way all around Lanka completely covering the land with those already at Lanka.'

'A hundred thousand bars and monkeys and several others already gathered at the gates of Lanka to fight proceeded.'

'All over the mountain the monkeys surrounded the boundary wall of Lanka city to collect information.'

'Mighty Vanaras holding uprooted trees occupied everywhere and it seemed difficult for even wind to enter Lanka.'

'Caught by Vanaras like clouds and equalled Indra in valour gave way to wonder for the Rakshasas.'

'Thereafter with the divisions of the Vanara army moving like the ocean on the mountain peak, appeared like the roaring sound of water in the ocean moving out of boundary.'

'By the great sound the boundary, the archways and the mountains and forests shook violently.'

'Protected by Rama and Lakshmana and Sugriva that an army of monkeys became difficult to assail even for Rakshasas and Devatas.'

"Deliberating on the action to be taken to kill the Rakshasas, Raghava himself called the army and gathered them and the ministers all of them again and again discussed and took the decision. Later recalling the king's duty with Vibheeshana, summoned Vali's son Angada and spoke these words."

'"O noble Hanuman crossing over Lanka without fear, giving up the difficulties experienced earlier we reached. Admonish the tenheaded king who has lost senses, his past fortune and sovereignty."'

'"O night ranger! the time has come for punishment for the sins committed by you to the sages, Devatas, so also to Gandharvas, celestial beauties, Nagas, Yakshas and the kings because of your delusion in conceit. Surely your pride about the boons begotten from the selfborn creator will be gone, said Rama.'

'"You, who have abducted my wife, I will punish you with a rod of punishment. I am your chastiser, O king of Lanka I have taken position."'

'"O Rakshasa! Even Devatas, sages and even royal sages have also lost their lives, killed by me."'

'"O lowly Rakshasa! By deceiving me you took away Sita. Display that strength now."'

'"If you do not seek my protection I will devoid this world of Rakshasas with my sharp arrows."'

'"This Vibheeshana, the best of Rakshasas will be glorious and fortunate undoubtedly having got the kingdom of Lanka."'

'"One who is not aware of himself, an unrighteous sinner ruling with foolish mates cannot enjoy the kingdom even for a moment."'

'"O Rakshasa! You are resorting to fortitude and valour and embracing gallantry in war. By my arrows you will obtain peace (in death)."'

'"O Ravana! You have no control over your mind, and if you come in the range of my eyesight and enter the three worlds also you will not go alive again."'

"Having addressed it in well meaning words, Rama said 'I will do you obsequies as no one will be left in Lanka to do your last rites'."

"Rama having spoken that way, Tara's son, Angada, who was like fire god, who was unwearied in action flew to the sky."

"Angada landed on Ravana's palace in a moment and saw the tiger like prosperous Ravana seated with his ministers."

'Thereafter, the leader of the monkeys, Angada adorned with golden armlets stood like a blazing fire at a distance.'

'"I made known the words of Rama completely without adding or deleting. You may listen."'

'"I am the son of Vali,by name Angada,an envoy of Rama ,the king of Kosala of unwearied action. You may know that I have landed"'

'"Raghava, the enhancer of the happiness of Kausalya speaks to you. Ruthless Rakshasa! Sallying forth, get ready for combat."'

'"You and your son\'s relatives and followers being killed (by me) the three worlds will be rid of fear of you."'

'"You are an enemy of the gods, Danavas and Yakshas, Gandharvas and Nagas and being a thorn in the neck of sages, I will uproot you from here."'

'"Unless you return back Vaidehi respectfully, bowing down to me you will be killed and Vibheeshana will get the fortune."'

'The leader of the monkeys having spoken in that manner, Ravana the ruler of night rangers was overtaken by fury.'

"Thereafter, Ravana who was shaken by fury repeatedly commanded his ministers and said 'Let this evil minded monkey be seized and killed'."

'Thereafter, having heard the words of Ravana, the four Rakshasas seized Angada blazing in brilliance like fire.'

'Then Angada, the son of Tara, on his own wanting to exhibit his strength in the presence of the Rakshasa army allowed himself to be caught.'

'Then Angada holding the Rakshasas by his arms came down like birds on the roof of the palace which stood like a mountain.'

'Crushed by that speed of Angada coming down as if from the sky all the Rakshasas fell down on the ground while the Rakshasa king looked on.'

"Then as the courageous Vali's son landed on the high peak of the palace which resembled a mountain peak, Ravana stood looking."

'As Ravana was looking, Angada trampling his feet gave way to the palace just as Himalayan peak broke to hit Indra.'

'Hitting on the peak of the palace, Angada declaring his own name emitting loud sound rose up to the sky.'

'Angada caused pain to the Rakshasas and delighted the monkeys and returned to the midst of Vanaras near Rama.'

'Ravana exhibiting extreme anger at the shattering of his palace and seeing his destruction started sighing heavily.'

'Delighted by the roaring sound of many monkeys Rama awaited surrounded by groups of monkeys desirous of starting war.'

'Sushena of great prowess, who resembled a mountain in form stood there surrounded by many Vanaras who could change their form at their will.'

'Sushena, a monkey who is difficult to encounter, went around all the four gates just like the moon goes around stars by the order of Sugriva.'

'Seeing the large army of a hundred Akshauhinis of monkeys staying near Lanka spreading beyond the sea waiting for war the Rakshasas were wonder struck, some feared, some were alarmed to witness the jubilant Vanaras who exhibited joy alone.'

'The Rakshasas were desperate to see the spread of monkeys over the entire area from the boundary to moat of Lanka. The way the space between was filled with Vanaras seemed as though the Vanaras converted into boundaries. Rakshasas were seen making a loud noise.'

"Then the Rakshasas proceeding to Ravana's abode informed that Rama along with the vanaras have occupied the whole of Lanka."

'On knowing that Lanka is occupied, the night ranger Ravana, became very furious and doubled the forces of Lanka for the protection and went to the top of Lanka palace.'

'He observed a countless number of Vanara troops spread all over Lanka, mountains, and forests.'

'Seeing the Vanaras occupying the entire earth, Ravana thought of destroying and started thinking.'

"Ravana, thinking over for long, picking up courage, saw Rama's Vanaras with thoughtful eyes."

'Raghava accompanied by the army happily went near and witnessed Lanka filled with Rakshasas all over.'

'The son of Dasaratha saw Lanka decorated with flags and posts and thinking of Sita he became very worried.'

'"Here (Lanka) is the daughter of Janaka, immersed in sorrow because of me, tormented and emaciated without food and struggling."'

'Thinking of Vaidehi again and again, who is pained, Rama ordered the Vanaras to kill the enemies immediately.'

"Ordered in that way by Rama, who does not cause sorrow, the monkeys roared like lions getting ready for war on hearing Rama's words."

'The monkey troops thought of crushing Lanka with their fists and mountain peaks.'

'Holding the mountain peaks, huge trees of many kinds, the Vanara leaders stood ready to fight.'

'To make Rama happy, all the Vanara army divided into groups and started ascending the boundary (of Lanka) walls the king of Rakshasas was witnessing.'

'Vanaras of copper colour faces and golden coloured ones, dedicating their lives for the sake of Rama holding Sala trees and rocks went towards Lanka.'

'With the means of mountain peaks, as well as their fists, the Vanaras scaled the boundary walls and gateways of the city.'

'The Vanaras started filling the moats with soil, pure water, logs of wood, grass, and mountain peaks.'

'Then the Vanaras in thousands and crores ascended Lanka.'

'The Vanaras started breaking the golden gateways and crushing them which were like peaks of Kailasa mountain.'

'Jumping here and there like huge elephants, the Vanaras roaring like lions went into Lanka.'

'"Victorious is Sri Rama, who is exceedingly strong and Lakshmana who is endowed with supreme strength. Victorious is Sugriva the king of Vanaras who is protected by Raghava on all sides."'

'Shouting in that manner, the monkeys who could change their form at their will started roaring and rushed towards the defensive walls.'

'Veerabahu, Subahu, Nala and the foremost of the Vanara leaders storming the boundary walls in the meantime went inside and stationed at the northeast gate.'

'Kumuda, surrounded by ten crores of mighty monkeys, who appeared like conquerors, stationed at the east gate.'

'Praghasa the broad shouldered Vanara, was surrounded by Panasa for assisting him who encamped surrounded by many.'

'Valiant Satabali with twenty crores of monkeys stood besieging the south gate.'

"Sushena, father of Tara, (Vali's wife) the mighty, stood with sixty crores of monkeys at the western gate."

'Reaching the north gate, Sri Rama along with Saumithri, blockading the gate stood Sugriva the Lord of monkeys.'

'Gavaksha of gigantic body and fierce appearance, along with one crore of Golangula species of monkeys endowed with extraordinary virility stood by the side of Sri Rama.'

"Accompanied by a crore of Bears of redoubtable fury, Dhumra (brother of Jambavan), an exterminator of foes endowed with extraordinary valour stood by Rama's side."

'Vibheeshana with defensive clamour, of extraordinary virility accompanied by his mighty ministers, stood there with his mace in hand.'

'Gaja, Gavaksha, Gava, Sarabha, Gandhamadana stood protecting the monkey troops wandering all over.'

'Thereafter Ravana, the Lord of Rakshasas overcome by fury ordered all his forces to advance.'

"Hearing the command issued from Ravana's mouth, immediately a terrific roar was raised by the night rangers."

'Then shone the white discs like the moon beaten by the Rakshasas with gold sticks making terrific sound.'

'With hundred thousand Rakshasas blowing sonorous conchs, with the wind from their mouths, terrific noise arose.'

'The night rangers with their brilliant dark limbs, with conchs, were like dark clouds provided with armour with flashes of lightning and accompanied by herons.'

'Urged by Ravana, the army then joyfully rushed forth swiftly like a great ocean at the time of universal destruction.'

'Thereafter the Vanara army emitted a sound that filled all sides of Malaya Mountain, its major and minor caves.'

'By the blast of conchs and roll of drums, and roar of lions of Vanara and Rakshasa forces it resounded all over the earth, sky and up to the ocean.'

'The trumpeting of the elephants, the neighing of horses, the clatter of the wheels of the chariots and the shout of Rakshasas resounded in the air.'

'In the meantime, dreadful conflict arose all over between Rakshasas and Vanaras, which was like the conflict between Devas and asuras earlier.'

'Vowing their own prowess, the Rakshasas began to strike the Vanaras with maces, flaming javelins, tridents, and pikes fiercely.'

'"May the vanara king,triumphant Sugriva be victorious", thus sounded the cry of vanaras in the battlefield.'

'Vanaras in the same manner attacked the Rakshasas, with trees and mountains, swiftly and with their nails and teeth.'

'Standing on the walls, the redoubtable Rakshasas, pierced the Vanaras with swords, dreadful Bhindipalas.'

'The vanaras jumping up dragged the Rakshasas stationed on the boundary wall down to the ground.'

'The conflict that happened between the Rakshasas and Vanaras was amazing and intense and left a mire of flesh and blood.', '।। इत्यार्षेश्रीमद्वाल्मीकिरामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्विचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the forty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Thereafter the gigantic army of Vanaras were fighting with exceedingly terrific Rakshasas and the anguished Rakshasas could not tolerate the sight.'

"Wishing victory for Ravana, the tiger among ogres, the Rakshasas of terrific deeds sallied forth accompanied by horses with golden trappings and seizing posts, which were like flames of fire shining like the sun's rays on the chariots and delightful shields, roaring resounding in all the ten directions."

'Wishing triumph even the powerful army of powerful Vanaras of terrific deeds went ahead to fight with Rakshasas.'

'At that time the Vanaras and Rakshasas facing each other started a dual fight.'

'Indrajith, an exceedingly brilliant Rakshasa, contended with Angada, son of Vali just like Lord Siva with and haka, the Lord of death.'

'Sampathi , who is invariably difficult to encounter in war fought with Prajangha, and Hanuman started with Jambumali.'

'Highly furious Rakshasa, Vibheeshana, brother of Ravana fought with Rakshasa, Mitraghna.'

'Gaja of great strength fought with Rakshasa Tapa, and highly energetic Neela fought with Nikumbha.'

'Sugriva the Lord of Vanaras fought with Praghana and prosperous Lakshmana fought with Virupaksha.'

'Agnikethu, a Rakshasa who is difficult to win over, Rasmikethu, Suptaghna and Yajnakepu waged war with Rama.'

'Vajramushti with Mainda and Asaniprabhu with Dwivida, the chief of monkeys, fought with the two Rakshasas.'

'Heroic and dreadful Pratapana, who is indomitable in the battle, fought with Nala endowed with high speed.'

'Mighty Sushena, the righteous son fought with well known Vidyunmali. And fierce monkeys and Rakshasas fought in dual war with each other.'

'Fierce war which made hair stand on end happened there, with the heroic Rakshasas and Vanaras longing for victory.'

'In that war, the streams of blood that flowed from the bodies of Vanaras and Rakshasas were strewn like weeds in the form of hair, bearing logs of wood in the form of dead bodies.'

'Enraged, Indrajith struck Angada with his mace, the destroyer of hostile forces which was like Indra who had done a hundred sacrifices, would strike with his thunderbolt.'

'With the same mace (snatched from the Rakshasa) Angada swiftly struck Indrajit hand destroyed the horse, chariot, and charioteer.'

'While Prajangha injured Sampathi with three arrows, in turn Sampathi killed him with Aswakarna tree in the midst of war.'

'Jambumali of extraordinary might mounting on the chariot in the battle pierced Hanuman in his chest.'

'Hanuman the son of wind god, getting on to the chariot quickly destroyed that Rakshasa Jambumali with his palm.'

'Dreadful Pratapan roared and jumped over Nala. Nala in turn gouged out the eyes of Pratapan.'

'Sugriva, the Vanara leader, taking hold of Sapataparni tree hit Pratapan who had his mouth open as if to swallow the army and killed him.'

'Even Agnikethu who is difficult to attack, Rakshasas Rasmikethu, also Mitarghna and Yajakopa mangled Sri Rama with arrows.'

'Raged Rama with his sharp arrows which were like flames of fire destroyed all the four Rakshasas by cutting their heads.'

'Even Vajramushti fell on the ground struck with the fist by Mainda and the chariot and charioteer fell like the fort.'

"Just as the Sun 's rays pierced through clouds Nikumbha was shattered and fell like a mass of collyrium in the battlefield."

'Nikumbha, the night ranger who was endowed with speed in shooting arrows again shot with a thousand arrows and laughed heartily.'

'Like Lord Vishnu, Nila took the wheels of the chariot of Nikumbha and shattered the charioteer into pieces.'

'Dwivida whose body was like a thunderbolt to feel, moved about on the mountain peak as Rakshasas were watching.'

'Asaniprabha shot arrows resembling lightning at Dwivida the Vanara Lord who was fighting with trees.'

'Dwivida whose limbs have been injured being enraged took Sala tree and killed Asaniprabha and the charioteer as well as the horses.'

'Vidyunmali mounting the chariot started releasing arrows covered with gold at Sushena and roared.'

'Nay, Sushena, the leader of Vanaras, saw himself down and Jambumali on top in the chariot. He crushed him with a big mountain peak.'

'Vidyunmali seeing Sushena, the monkey leader got a huge rock, and hit him on his chest with the mace.'

'Thereafter overtaken by anger, the monkey leader Sushena seized the huge rock from the Rakshasa and dropped it.'

'Then Vidyunmali, seeing the leader of monkeys getting the huge rock, hit him on the chest with the mace.'

"The great monkey leader Sushena, not caring for the mace, dropped the rock on Vidyunmali's chest."

'Vidyunmali, the Rakshasa hit by the huge rock, was ceased of life.'

'In that manner the Rakshasa warriors and the Vanara warriors fought the duel wonderfully and like the way Devatas killed the Demons, the Rakshasas were killed.'

'The battlefield was dreadful and, frequented by jackals with spears, javelins, maces, and swords, strewn all over, similarly with broken chariots, horses, elephants, and monkeys fit for war. Broken wheels and axles of chariots were found all over.'

'It was like the war between Devatas and demons, with the trunks of the bodies of Vanaras and Rakshasas rubbing together lying scattered in all directions.'

'Then the Rakshasas killed by Vanara leaders, their bodies full of blood were looking for sunset and again picking up strength began to battle.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the forty third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Thus, as the Vanaras and Rakshasas were battling, the Sun began to set, which is not favourable to the life of Vanaras.'

'Then Vanaras and dreadful Rakshasas being strongly inimical to each other started the night battle wishing victory.'

'In the fierce darkness that prevailed, monkeys hit monkeys thinking to be Rakshasas and Rakshasas hit Rakshasas thinking to be Vanaras (not knowing in darkness) hit each other.'

'"Strike", "Tear", "Why are you running away?" were the kind of tumultuous echo heard in the darkness of the night. In that darkness the dark complexioned Vanaras and Rakshasas covered with golden armour in the night seemed like shining herbs of the forest in the mountain.'

'In that pitch darkness, which was difficult even to move, the Rakshasas overcome by anger and lost senses were wandering devouring the monkeys.'

'The mighty strong Vanaras, terribly angry at the Rakshasas sprang up to the sky, and tore with their sharp teeth, the horses of Rakshasas decked with golden ornaments pervading like fire in the battle.'

'Having lost senses in fury they dragged the elephants, those mounted upon them, and the chariots decorated with posts and flags and tore them with their teeth.'

'Then Rama as well as Lakshmana with their venomous snakelike arrows killed both visible and invisible principal Rakshasas.'

"Then the dust rose from the ground pulverised the horses' hooves and crushed by the chariot wheels, filling the ears and eyes of those in war."

'In that way as the war was going on, and rivers of blood flowing with the terrific noise it made hair stand on end.'

'There arose wonderful sounds of musical instruments, the sounds of kettle drums, wooden drums, mixed with conchs and flutes.'

'There from the battlefield arose the roaring sounds of wounded and appeased Rakshasas and Vanaras.'

'There with warriors of Vanaras wounded by javelins, tridents and axes, and the Rakshasas of mountain size who could change their form at will, the battlefield was muddy, and wet with blood flowing and difficult to reach.'

'Like the dreadful night for all beings, difficult to spend, as if it were a dissolution, destructive to Vanaras and Rakshasas.'

'Thereafter in that exceedingly fearsome dark night in the battlefield highly delighted Rakshasas assailed Rama with a rain of arrows.'

'The thundering noise of the angry Rakshasas rushing towards Rama was like the seven seas rising to flow into the ocean.'

"On Rama striking with the six best of shafts like flames in a time of twinkling of eyelids, the six Rakshasas, Yamasatru, Mahaparva, Mahodara, Mahakaya, and Vajradamshtra found it difficult to overcome. Along with the two Suka, Saranas all of them were struck by Rama's fire like arrows in their vital parts and escaped with leftover life."

'Mighty Rama with his shafts that were like flames of fire, decorated with gold, brightened in all directions.'

'Those fierce Rakshasas who stood in front of Rama were destroyed like fireflies fallen in fire.'

'By the rain of thousands of golden feathered arrows, the night appeared as if illumined by fireflies and like a wonderful autumnal night.'

'The night which was fierce appeared more dreadful with the loud noise of Rakshasas and Vanaras.'

"Resounding with the sound rising all over the caves of Trikuta mountain echoed and it looked as if the mountain was responding to someone's call."

'The dark complexioned Rakshasas of gigantic body, who were highly energetic were held tightly by the monkeys with black faces and long tails and allowed them to be devoured.'

"Angada who was determined to kill the enemies, in no time wounded Ravana's charioteer and also the horses."

'As the violent war was going on, the great cheat, Indrajith disappeared from there as Angada had already killed his horses and charioteer.'

'Angada who was worthy of worship, was praised by even the sages, all deities and both Rama and Lakshmana for his action.'

"All beings present in war were aware of Indrajith's deeds. Therefore, they were gratified to see him defeated."

'Thereafter, Sugriva, Vibheeshana and all monkeys gratified with Angada\'s deed cried out saying "Excellent, Well done".'

'Then Indrajith of terrible deeds defeated by Angada in the comb at became terribly angry.'

'That sinful son of Ravana, who is capable of encountering rising up remained invisible and shot sharp arrows.'

'The angry Rakshasa (remaining invisible) pierced arrows full of serpents all over the body of Rama and Lakshmana.'

'The Rakshasa waging war in invisible form with all beings by his supernatural powers fought with both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana and bound them in a network of arrows.'

'Then the Vanaras beheld the two brothers, tigers among men bound forcibly by the angry Rakshasas like venomous monkeys.'

"Then the evil minded Rakshasa king's son, being incapable of getting bound in visible form, by remaining invisible, bound them deceitfully.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुश्चत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the forty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Rama, the son of the king, a powerful and strong warrior, ordered ten Vanaras to know the whereabouts (of Indrajith).'

'Rama, the scorcher of enemies, ordered the two sons of Sushena, the best of Vanaras Neela, Jambavantha, Angada, as well as courageous Sarabha, Vinatha, and Hanumantha and Sanuprastha endowed with extraordinary might, also Rshaba and Rshaba Skanda.'

'All those monkeys, exceedingly rejoiced, held huge trees, and went in ten directions searching and sprang to the sky.'

"Ravana's son being skilled in the use of weapons and an expert in mystic powers, he prohibited the speed of the Vanaras with his swift arrows."

'The Vanaras were mangled with iron arrows, however endowed with high speed they could not make out Indrajith in utter darkness just as the sun covered by clouds.'

'Indrajith who is ever victorious, pierced repeatedly arrows all over the body of Rama and Lakshmana.'

'Both Rama and Lakshmana were pierced by furious Indrajith with serpents like arrows furious.'

'Both Rama and Lakshmana bleeding excessively, wounded profusely, looked bright and red like Kimsuka trees with flowers.'

"Then Ravana's son with the corner of his eyes turned red in anger looking like a huge collyrium, vanished from there and spoke these words to the two brothers, Rama, and Lakshmana."

'Indrajith who had fire like eyes, said," even the ruler of gods cannot discern while I am fighting war, why speak about you? It is not possible."'

'"Raghava brothers! You are enmeshed with plumes of arrows all over the body. My anger will not go waste. I will send you to the abode of Yama, the Lord of death."'

'Indrajith having spoken to the righteous brothers Rama and Lakshmana in that way, began to pain them with arrows and stood rejoiced roaring aloud.'

'Indrajith who was like a mass of crushed black hill, mounting the huge bow released terrific arrows again and again in that great conflict.'

'There after that warrior went on digging sharp arrows into the vital parts of Rama and Lakshmana again and again and kept roaring.'

'In a fraction of a second, both Rama and Lakshmana facing the battle were bound by arrows and did not have energy to retaliate.'

'Pierced all over their bodies with the heads of arrows, the gallant princes freed themselves from the cords by shaking violently like the banners of Indra. Pained by the hurting of the vital parts of both the princes, the Lords of the world fell.'

"The princes were lying on the warrior's bed in the battlefield, their limbs fully covered with arrows, in a highly distressed state."

'Not an inch of space on their bodies remained without being pierced. Not even a part of the body was left unshaken, unhurt, or wounded.'

'Wounded by the cruel Rakshasas capable of changing form at their will, blood flowed from their body copiously like water from spring bringing out their vital life breaths.'

'Rama fell first pierced by arrows in his vital parts released in anger by Indrajith, by whom Indra was utterly defeated.'

'Indrajith pierced Rama with arrows coated with gold and gold tipped arrows, which had even and circular heads, with halfmoon arrows, with axe like heads, heads like joined palms, heads resembling teeth of calf and lion teeth arrows as well as razor sharp arrows which descended quickly unobstructed like dust.'

"Rama lay relaxed on the hero's bed quitting his goldplated bow strung and bent at both ends, and the middle."

"Lakshmana remained beholding the best of men fallen at an arrow's throw disappointed at his life."

'Lakshmana grieved seeing his elder brother Rama pierced by arrows, pained, and fallen on the ground.'

"Even the monkeys' eyes were filled with tears, very much stricken with grief seeing Rama fallen and shrieked."

"Hanuman's army of Vanaras collected together stood surrounding fallen princes lying on the ground, despondent and extremely sorrowful.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the forty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Thereafter looking at the sky and the ground for Rama and Lakshmana, the Vanara leaders saw the two brothers, lying on the ground hurt by arrows.'

'Indrajith retired after completing the task, like a cloud that retires after raining. Then came Vibheeshana and Sugriva to that location.'

'Neela, Dwivida, Mainda, Sushena, Kumuda, Angada accompanied by Hanuman grieved intensely on looking at the Raghavas.'

'Unable to move, with feeble breath, drenched in blood and the body covered all over with arrows, lying on a bed of arrows, stunned, with reduced prowess, sighing like serpents, the heroes, Rama, and Lakshmana, who were like golden posts became dull. Rama and Lakshmana were lying on a heroic bed, arrows stuck to the bodies. Vibheeshana and all the Vanaras kept seeing both the scions and wept surrounding them.'

'Though the Vanaras searched all over the battlefield and in all directions of the sky, they could not see Indrajith of mystical powers.'

"Vibheeshana started looking with occult powers for his brother's son endowed with occult power following occult means and found Indrajith."

'Brilliant and glorious Vibheeshana, capable of difficult deeds, incomparable at work, and in fight, unrivalled in battle, saw the hidden hero Indrajith by virtue of a boon (from Brahma).'

'Reviewing the scions lying on bed by his action, Indrajith caused extreme joy to all Rakshasas and spoke.'

'"The two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who slayed Dushana and Khara have been struck."'

'"Even if all the sages, Devatas and Rakshasas collected together come, they cannot get liberated from this bondage of arrows."'

'"On whose account my father was in grief and spent all night and passed the three parts of the night (without sleep) and why he was unable to sleep was not understood clearly. By his (Rama\'s) action this Lanka is agitated like a river during the rainy season. He, who is the root cause of this calamity, has been got rid of by me," thought Indrajith.'

'"Rama, and Lakshmana and even all valiant Vanaras have been got rid of just like clouds of autumn are wasted."'

'Indrajith, having spoken in that way to all Rakshasas, began to strike all the Vanara leaders looking at him.'

'The slayer of enemies, Indrajith attacked Neela with nine shafts, so also Mainda and Dwivida with three separate sharpedged shafts.'

'Indrajith endowed with great bow pierced Jambavan in his chest, and released ten arrows at Hanuman, endowed with speed in war.'

'Indrajith endowed with speed in war, attacked highly energetic Gavaksha and Sarabha with two arrows each.'

"Thereafter Indrajith attacked the ruler of Golangulas, and Vali's son Angada with many arrows."

'Mighty son of Ravana, then attacked the best of monkeys with arrows which were like flames of fire.'

'Indrajith hurt the Vanaras with hails of arrows terrifying them. Then the mighty armed son of Ravana laughed and spoke these words.'

'"O Rakshasas! Look at these two brothers together bound by my fierce arrows in front of you."'

'Indrajith having spoken in that way to the Rakshasas, all of them were highly amazed by the action of Indrajith and went laughing.'

"The Rakshasas thundering like rain clouds, roaring aloud thinking 'Rama is killed' by Ravana's son offered prayers."

'Thereafter having seen the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana not responding or breathing, lying on the ground, he thought they were dead.'

'Indrajith, who is victorious in battles, feeling happy and creating happiness to all Rakshasas collected there entered the city of Lanka.'

'Sugriva was overtaken by fear on seeing Rama and Lakshmana riddled with arrows from head to foot all over the body'

'"O Vanara! We are helpless, be confident, for those following righteousness and truthfulness there is no fear of death."'

'Vibheeshana, having spoken in that manner, there after dipped his hand in water and wiped the beautiful eyes of Sugriva to brighten.'

"Thereafter the dutiful Vibheeshana taking water as per tradition consecrated chanting sacred text and wiped Sugriva's eyes."

"Wise Vibheeshana having wiped Sugriva's face clean in accordance with time addressed with opportune words."

'"O king of monkeys! This is not the time for faint heartedness. Extreme attachment at this time will lead us to death."'

'"Therefore, give up faintheartedness as all actions will be destroyed by that. Following Rama\'s leadership, think of the army\'s welfare."'

'"Or else till they become conscious, protect the Kakuthsa princes. When they become conscious, they can get rid of our fear."'

'"Therefore, Rama has no fear of death, even a little. Whatever splendour is lost, prosperity will not leave him."'

'"Therefore, restoring breath let us reassure the army again till all actions are carried out by restoring their confidence."'

'"O Monkey leader! these monkeys whose eyes have become big (are dilated) with fear are talking ear to ear (about Rama)."'

'"Let the army forces of monkeys be happy seeing me moving, getting rid of the inherent fear in them just as they discard a garland of flowers enjoyed by them earlier."'

'The king of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana having assured Sugriva, knowing the Vanara army he reassured them.'

'Great Indrajith surrounded by all army entered the city of Lanka and approached his father.'

'Having reached Ravana, Indrajith greeted him with folded palms and broke the pleasant news, "Rama and Lakshmana are killed."'

'In the midst of Rakshasas, Ravana hearing the news of his enemies being killed, rejoiced, and got up from his couch and embraced his son.'

'Delighted Ravana kissed his son on the forehead and enquired of him of the details. Indrajith presented details saying that both Rama and Lakshmana were stunned in the network of arrows, and lost splendour.'

"Hearing the words of the great chariot warrior, Ravana was filled with excessive joy at heart. His fear and agony of Dasaratha's son having gone on hearing the words of his son, Ravana greeted him.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषटचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the forty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"After accomplishing the task Ravana's son entered Lanka while the bull among monkeys guarded Raghava staying around."

'Having arranged the army in place, Hanuman, Angada, Nila, Kumuda, Nala, Gava, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Sanuprastha, Jambavan, Rshaba, Rambha, Satavali, Pruthu, who are always alert were holding trees and looking above, on either side and in all directions and guarded Rama. Whenever there was movement of even a blade of grass, they thought that it might be Rakshasa.'

'Ravana was also content to send away his son Indrajith and calls for the Rakshasa woman, caretaker of Sita.'

'The rakshasi and also Trijata came and waited there by the order. Lowly Rakshasa, Ravana, full of joy addressed rakshasi.'

'"Rama and Lakshmana are killed by Indrajith in war. Take Vaidehi in the aerial car and show her."'

'"That husband with whose support she was proud and not yielding to me is unconscious along with his brother who have been killed," said Ravana.'

'"Mythili, rid of sorrow and free from perturbation, giving up hope (of Rama) can wait upon me adorned with all kinds of jewels."'

'Ravana thought that the broad eyed Sita coming to conclusion in course of time that Rama has gone along with Lakshmana, rid of hope, with no other haven, will seek him on her own accord.'

"The evil minded Rakshasas listening to Ravana's words went to the aerial car."

"Thereafter, by Ravana's order the Rakshasas went with the aerial car to Mythili in the Ashoka Garden."

"Then the Rakshasas took the aerial car near Sita who was overcome by her husband's grief."

'Thereafter the Rakshasas along with Trijata went to Sita and made her ascend Pushpaka to see Rama and Lakshmana.'

'The Lord of Rakshasas rejoiced and went to Lanka decorated with flags and posts proclaiming that Rama and Lakshmana were killed by Indrajith in war.'

'Sita and Trijata flying on the Pushpaka saw all the fallen Vanara army.'

'Sita beheld extremely happy Rakshasas, and grief stricken Vanaras, in great agony near Rama and Lakshmana.'

'Thereafter Sita beheld both Rama and Lakshmana lying on the bed of arrows, unconscious, struck by arrows, with shields of darts, arrows with feathers, all limbs wounded with shattered armour, bows and reeds.'

'Seeing the gallant bulls among men, the two brothers with big eyes, the two heroes like sons of fire god lying on the bed of arrows in such a state, Sita was filled with intense sorrow and pity burst into tears being affected extremely.'

"Janaka's daughter of beautiful limbs and dark eyes, seeing her husband and Lakshmana, both powerful ones rolling, roared aloud."

'On seeing her husband killed and also mighty Lakshmana, Sita became emotional in intense sorrow and cried piteously.'

'"Whoever was capable of predicting the future have said that I will be the mother of sons and not become a widow. Now if Rama is dead, they become liars."'

'"Whoever conducted sacrificial ceremonies and are knowledgeable of sastras have told me that I would be consort. They are all liars now as Rama is killed."'

'"The astrologers, brahmins who have promised me to be auspicious and all the wise who have spoken are liars if Rama is killed."'

'"Whoever has told me that I will be the wife of a man of great prowess, worshipped by husband, and all wise men are liars if Rama is killed."'

'"Those virtuous lotus marks that a woman has on their feet to become crowned queen of a kingdom are seen in my feet."'

'"Those inauspicious signs found in unlucky and widowed women are difficult to find in me. I do not see any such signs in me."'

'"Characteristic marks of lotuses, unfailing in their effect (truthful) predicted are all false if Rama is killed."'

'"My hair is fine and dark, my eyebrows are uniform and not joined, my shanks are round devoid of hair, and my teeth are closely set."'

'"My temporal bones, eyes, hands, feet, ankles, thighs are even, and my fingers are fleshy and round with nails proportioned and bright."'

'"My breasts are well formed and developed, the nipples are depressed and joined, the navel is deep, and the surrounding part is fleshy."'

'"My complexion is like the shine of a gem. My hair on the skin is soft. When I touch the ground with my ten fingers and toes, it is said to leave auspicious marks."'

'"My palms and feet placed together have no space which are auspicious marks and brahmins have said that my gentle smile is also a mark of auspiciousness."'

'"The prediction of astrologers that I will be consecrated with my husband and all that is falsified."'

'"Having gained Janasthana and crossing the ocean which is impossible knowing about my whereabouts and getting me is impossible since the brothers have been killed by the maya of Indrajith whose footprints are like a cow\'s hoof."'

'"Raghavas knew to use Varuna\'s weapons, fire god\'s weapons, Indra\'s also, even wind god\'s and Brahma\'s weapons. Why have they not used?"'

'"Indrajith remaining invisible in war by conjuring could kill my husband who is equal to Indra in valour. Rama and Lakshmana! I am orphaned now."'

'"Even if the enemy is endowed with speed of thought, if he comes in the range of Rama\'s sight, he will not go alive."'

'"Rama along with Lakshmana has fallen in the battlefield. Time spirit is too heavy and capable of doing anything, so difficult to conquer."'

'"When I think of Rama or even great warrior Lakshmana, or my mother or myself I am not so sad as when I think of my motherinlaw who is an observer of austerity."'

'"She will also be worried and wait for Rama who has completed his vow (for fourteen years) and Lakshmana and Sita to come."'

"Looking at Sita, worried, Trijata said 'Devi, do not despair. Your husband is alive'."

'"O Devi! Rama and Lakshmana are alive. I see great reasons for this."'

'"If a husband ceases life in war, their face will not have an angry look or happy appearance."'

'"Vaidehi! Indeed, this aerial car called Pushpaka which is an auspicious one would not have brought you if they are ceased of life."'

'"The army chief killed, the interest of the troop lost, Pushpaka will move about without making an effort like the ship which lost the helmsman."'

'"O Lady, given to austerities! These monkeys are guarding Kakuthsa as proclaimed by me lovingly. Do not be confused. They are safe."'

'"This army is not doubting, not perturbed also, that they are killed. They are guarding the Kakutsthas lovingly. I am telling you."'

'"I have not uttered untruth earlier nor shall I do now. Indeed, you have found entry into my mind being a woman of good disposition."'

'"These two are not capable of being won in war even by gods or demons. On observation of the indications by me I am making you realize."'

'"O Mythili! Even though both of them have fallen and unconscious under arrows their body splendour has not diminished. You may see."'

'"Normally when we see men who have ceased life and stopped breathing their features are unappealing."'

'"O Janaka\'s daughter! You give up grief and delusion about Rama and Lakshmana. They are alive, no doubt."'

'Sita who was like deity, on hearing the words of consolation, spoken by Trijata, greeted Trijata with palms together.'

'Then Trijata took Sita in the Pushpaka chariot endowed with the speed of mind and entered Lanka.'

'Thereafter Sita along with Trijata went to Pushpaka. Making Sita to get down, rakshasi also entered Ashoka grove.'

"Having entered the Rakshasa's pleasure garden which had many trees, Sita gave way to intense sorrow having keenly observed the king's sons.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टचत्वारिंशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the forty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Sugriva, the very powerful one and all the best of Vanaras stood immersed in sorrow surrounding the great sons of Dasaratha, who were lying on the ground bound by a network of arrows like serpents, sighing, bodies covered with blood.'

'Sugriva, the very powerful one and all the best of Vanaras stood immersed in sorrow surrounding the great sons of Dasaratha, who were lying on the ground bound by a network of arrows like serpents, sighing, bodies covered with blood.'

'In the meantime, Rama, although bound, being a man of fortitude established in spiritual discipline, returned to consciousness.'

'There after seeing the piteous countenance of his brother, bound, and injured, Rama lamented.'

'"Of what purpose is my life when I behold my brother lying lifeless in war? What do I have with Sita? Or even with my life?"'

'"In a mortal world I can look for a woman like Sita but not possible to find a helpful and capable brother."'

'"If Sumithra\'s dear son gets merged with the five elements, I will give up my life as the Vanaras are beholding."'

'"What can I say to mother Kausalya, Kaikeyi and mother Sumithra waiting to see her son?"'

'"If I go to Ayodhya without him, how can I console Sumithra crying aloud like a female osprey?"'

'"How can I return bereft of Lakshmana who went with me to the forest? What can I tell Satrughna, also the Bharata of great fame?"'

'"If Sumithra asks me, I can\'t endure. I cannot bear it. I shall give up my body, my life here itself."'

'"What a pity! Me of sinful deeds and not a noble one, because of whose action Lakshmana\'s life having departed and lying on the bed of arrows."'

'"You were always comforting me when I was sad. Now however much I am grieved, ceased of life you cannot comfort me."'

'"You, who have struck down many Rakshasas in war, are lying unconscious on the same ground struck by arrows."'

'"Lying on the bed of arrows in the network of arrows, blood flowing out from the body he remains shining like the setting sun."'

'"Struck in the vital parts by the arrows, it is not possible for you to speak, but your anguish is indicated in your looks."'

'"This Lakshmana glowing in brightness, travelled with me following me in the forest. In the same way I shall follow him to the abode of death."'

'"He who was liked by relatives, was following ignoble me ever devoutly has reached this state."'

'"Indeed, heroic Lakshmana never uttered an unpalatable word. I do not remember him speaking harsh words even when he was deeply provoked."'

'"He who, in one go released five hundred arrows (with two hand s) is therefore superior to Kartaveerya (with thousand hands) releasing the same arrows."'

'"He, who could destroy Indra\'s arrows also deserves to be on Indra\'s bed, is lying on the ground, killed."'

'"I have not made Vibheeshana as the king of Rakshasas. Because of that untruth utterance they want to consume me, no doubt."'

'"Sugriva! You return back from here now. Strong Ravana will chase you because of my not being here."'

'"Sugriva! Return back from here along with the army keeping Angada in front, even Neela and Nala. Cross the ocean."'

'"O King of Bears! King of Golangulas! Difficult action has been done by you and others in war. I am pleased with Hanumantha\'s action."'

'"Formidable war was done by Angada, Mainda, Dwivida, and by all the Vanaras, Kesari and Sampathi."'

'"Gava, Gavaksha, Sarabha and others even Vanaras have done war sacrificing their lives for me."'

'"Sugriva! It is not possible for human beings to overcome God (destiny). O scorcher of enemies! Sugriva, my best friend, you have all done righteously that which is not possible."'

'"O Bulls among Vanaras! All of you should go permitted by me. You have done friend\'s work. You may go where you wish to go. I permit said Rama."'

'All the Vanaras started shedding tears from their tawny eyes on listening to the lamentation of Rama.'

'Thereafter, Vibheeshana, settling all the army, hastened to reach Raghava with a mace.'

'Seeing Vibheeshana resembling a dark mountain, thinking him to be Indrajith, all the Vanaras ran from there.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the forty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Extremely brilliant and mighty Sugriva looking at the army of Vanaras said, "Why are you worried like a boat tossed by wind in water?"'

'On hearing Sugriva\'s question, Angada the son of Vali said, "Did you not see Dasaratha\'s sons Rama and chariot warrior Lakshmana, the great souls lying on a bed of arrows bathed in blood?"'

'Then Vanara king Sugriva looking at Angada said, "I do not think that the Vanaras running like this is not without any cause. Maybe out of fear of some reason ahead."'

'"Here, the distressed Vanaras with sad faces, their eyes downcast, are fleeing in all directions abandoning their arms."'

'"Without waiting to look back at others, not shy to see one another, the Vanaras are distancing themselves from those fallen and are seen fleeing."'

'In the meantime, heroic Vibheeshana holding mace came to Sugriva and Rama and cheered with victory.'

'Beholding Vibheeshana, the Vanaras fled, said Sugriva to the great Jambavan who stood near him.'

'"Vibheeshana has come here. Beholding him the foremost of the Vanaras fleeing suspecting him to be the son of Ravana."'

'"Call them back who are running in different directions quickly. Tell them Vibheeshana has come here."'

'Sugriva having spoken in that way, the king of Bears, Jambavan restored the confidence of Vanaras.'

'Having heard Jambavan, all the Vanaras finally shed their fear and returned to see Vibheeshana.'

'On seeing the body of Rama and Lakshmana fully covered by arrows, Vibheeshana also became piteous and sad.'

'Vibheeshana, wetting his hands with water cleaned the eyes of Rama and Lakshmana. Tormented with pain he cried aloud.'

'"Both the princess, who are endowed with good nature, and power are fond of combat. The Rakshasas have reduced them to this state by their deceitful ways."'

'"The princess who were guileless in their prowess were cheated by my evil minded and stupid son of my brother by his crooked thinking and cheating."'

'"Pierced with arrows, fully covered with blood, the bodies of the two princes appear like porcupines sleeping on the ground."'

'"These two bulls among men of great valour and fame whose refuge was sought by me are lying asleep wounded all over and limbs broken."'

'"Having lost my life ambition for the kingdom, frustrated I am. My enemy Ravana, having succeeded in his vow, did this deed."'

'To Vibheeshana who was lamenting in that way, Sugriva, who was endowed with good qualities embraced him and spoke.'

'"O righteous one! there is no doubt that you will attain the kingdom of Lanka. Ravana and his sons will not attain what they desire."'

'"Both these heroes Raghava and Lakshmana wounded and pained having shaken off from their unconscious state will kill Ravana and his army in war."'

'Thus, consoling and pacifying, the Rakshasa, Vibheeshana in that manner, Sugriva turned to his uncle Sushena and spoke.'

'"On regaining consciousness, take the brothers Rama and Lakshmana, the tamers of enemies to Kishkinda accompanied by the heroic monkey army."'

'"On killing Ravana and his sons along with his kin, I will on my part also bring Mythili just as Indra recovered his prosperity."'

'Hearing the words of Vanara Lord, Sushena spoke about the fierce and great war that he had experienced between Devas and asuras.'

'"Then the Rakshasas adept in using arms went about agitating concealing themselves, attacking Devatas who were learned in using arms."'

'"Brhaspati, the priest restored the wounded and lifeless, unconscious by means of reciting mantras, prayers and treatment by herbs."'

'"Let Sampati and Panasa go quickly to the milky ocean in a swift phase to get those medicines."'

'"Those monkeys only know the supreme medicine available in the mountains. They have to get Sanjeevakarani and Visalyakarani known to Brahma."'

'"There, where the milky ocean, the foremost of oceans, was churned, two mountains have risen by the name Chandra and Drona. The supreme herbs of medicine are present there."'

'"Both the mountains are well known. Deities have kept the herbal medicine there. Let the son of wind god, Hanuman proceed."'

'In the mean while winds blew, clouds also rose up, water in the ocean was scattered about by the wind and lightning appeared in the sky.'

'All the huge trees of the island were broken by the flutter of the wings (of Garuda) and fell into the salt water of the ocean.'

'All the serpents and sea monsters inhabiting there terrified at Garuda went quickly into the salty waters of the ocean.'

'Then all the Vanaras perceived Garuda endowed with mighty prowess, the son of Vinatha blazing like fire.'

'Seeing the noble Rama and Lakshmana bound by the serpents in the form of arrows (released by Indrajith), the serpents fled.'

'Thereafter Garuda paying his respects to the noble Rama and Lakshmana, touching their feet, wiped their face which shone like the moon.'

'Caressed by Garuda, both their bodies were cleared of wounds instantly shone like gold and turned bright.'

'Their brilliance, prowess, daring courage, intelligence, memory, and great qualities got manifested many folds.'

'Raising up both the princes who were extraordinarily brilliant and equalled Indra, Garuda embraced Rama joyfully and thus spoke.'

'"By your kindness, we have overcome this calamity caused by Ravana\'s son and regained our strength as before."'

'"For me to meet you is like meeting my father Dasaratha and grandfather, Aja. My heart rejoices."'

'"Who are you, richly endowed with charming appearance, smeared with unguents adored in dust free garments, wearing beautiful ornaments?"'

'To Rama whose eyes were filled with joyful tears, Vinatha, the king of birds, full of brightness and strength said.'

'"O Kakuthsa! I am Garuthman, your dear friend and your outer breath. I reached here to help you."'

'"For the demons endowed with great strength and of mighty valour or for Gandharvas, or Vanaras or for even Devatas, or Indra who has done a hundred sacrifices, it is not possible to get relieved from bondage of the arrows of Indrajith of cruel deeds carried out by tricks."'

'"These arrows are serpents born of Kadra Devata. They have sharp fangs and are highly poisonous. By the tricks of Rakshasa, it has turned into arrows and reached you."'

'"You are lucky and also Lakshmana your brother, destroyer of foes in war. Rama your strength is truth, and you are righteous."'

'"Having heard the information about both of you bound by serpents, out of my friendship and affection and in obedience to you I hastened and reached here."'

'"Considering it as my duty to relieve you both from the frightful bondage of snakes I reached. Do not be inattentive and guileless."'

'"Rakshasas by nature use tricks in war. For noble people with good nature guilelessness is strength."'

'"Being so you should not trust Rakshasas. By this experience you know that Rakshasas are crooked."'

'Having said so, Suparna endowed with mighty strength embraced Rama most affectionately and took leave of him.'

'"My dear friend! I wish to take leave of you. Truly you are knower of what is right, and you are dear even to an enemy."'

'"Heroic Rama! No question about your curiosity about our friendship now. After winning the war you will recognize."'

'"Lanka will be left with youngsters and the aged with your arrows. The enemy Ravana killed, you will recover Sita."'

'Having spoken to Rama in that manner, Suparna endowed with wind speed in flight embraced Rama and went around him as a mark of reverence and soared into the sky.'

'Thereafter the Vanara troops, seeing the Raghavas freed from anguish, roared like a lion, and lashed their tails.'

'Then the Vanaras played drums and even mridangams, blew conches and started jumping and leaping as before.'

'The Vanaras who can fight with trees, uprooted several trees expressing their capacity distinctly and breaking them, and cracking their fingers. Making loud noise in hundreds and thousands stood there.'

'Making a lot of noise, the Vanaras reached the gates of Lanka frightening night rangers and desiring to wage war.'

'Thundering sounds resembling heavy clouds making terrific sounds arose, as if universal destruction was taking place at midnight.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fiftieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Then Ravana and all the Rakshasas heard the increasing and highly tumultuous sound made by the courageous Vanaras.'

"Thereafter, hearing the loud and deep sounds of roaring and seeing his (Ravana's) ministers in the midst, he spoke as follows."

'"Many Vanaras have collected together and roared making loud noises just as thunder rumbling clouds. By that there is no doubt that they are very happy. For that reason, even the wide ocean is agitated."'

'"The two brothers Rama and Lakshmana are bound by sharp arrows. By the loud noise that I hear I doubt in my mind!"'

'Having spoken like that to the ministers, the Lord of Rakshasas said to the Rakshasas who stood waiting close by.'

'"For what reason are the Vanaras (rangers of woods) rejoicing that way in the time of grief? It may be found out speedily."'

'Ravana having said so, the bewildered Rakshasas scaling the boundary wall beheld the army protected by great Sugriva and the prosperous Raghavas relieved from arrows and happy, he became worried.'

'All the dreadful Rakshasas getting down the boundary wall with pale faces, sad countenance reached the Lord of Rakshasas.'

'Rakshasas who were well versed in talking, desperately conveyed the unpleasantness as it is to Ravana.'

'"The two brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, who are like powerful elephants have been set free from the bondage of arrows of Indrajith in the battlefield. Their shoulders are relieved and are like elephants snapped off the rope binding them."'

'The Rakshasa king endowed with mighty prowess became pale in face, worried and enraged on hearing the words of Rakshasas.'

'"My enemies who are bound by the formidable and unfailing, sharp, poisonous and bright arrows like the sun of Indrajith blessed with boons, are liberated from the bondage! I doubt if my army is in danger!"'

'"My arrows which are equal in brilliance to Vasuki by which my enemies\' life was taken away has become in fructuous now."'

'Having said so, hissing Ravana called Dhumraksha to the midst.'

'"Dhumraksha of fierce prowess, you along with a huge Rakshasa army go just now to destroy Rama along with able Vanaras."'

'Commanded by the Intelligent king of Rakshasas in that manner, Dhumraksha offered prayers and went from there joyfully.'

'There after Dhumraksha went from the gateway and said to the CommanderinChief of the army" Get ready immediately and start quickly. Why delay?"'

'On hearing the words of Dhumraksha, the CommanderinChief of the large army, he got ready quickly by the order of Ravana.'

'Mighty army bound with girdles of bells to their waist, of fierce form roaring surrounded Dhumraksha joyfully.'

'The dreadful Rakshasas set out roaring like rain clouds armed with different kinds of weapons, like tridents, darts, maces, spears, iron bars, rods, even clubs, spears and slings, arrows in thousands.'

'And others collected together holding shields, fearless like tigers, frightful in appearance, mounted on fast horses, chariots yoked to donkeys of different kinds covered with gold mesh, on maddened elephants Set out.'

'Dhumraksha of frightful tone mounted on a chariot adorned with gold yoked to donkeys with lion and bear like faces.'

'Heroic Rakshasa, Dhumraksha surrounded by rakshasas set forth laughing to the west gate where Hanuman stood.'

'While the Rakshasa was mounted on the chariot and going braying like a donkey, a fearful bird going in the sky stood before his chariot.'

'A foul smelling frightening vulture (that feeds on the dead body) descended on top of the chariot and fell down.'

'A trunk of a white bird drenched in blood sounding discordant fell near by Dhumraksha. It appeared like a rain god shedding blood on the ground.'

'Thunder like roar was heard. Wind blew adversely. Darkness pervaded, and directions could not be seen.'

'Then Rakshasa feared seeing the dreadful manifestation and got worried. All the Rakshasas walking in front of Dhumraksha lost consciousness.'

'Thereafter many strong and powerful Rakshasas surrounding Dhumraksha, who was enthusiastic about war, beheld many Vanaras protected by Raghava like at universal dissolution.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fifty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Seeing Dhumraksha of terrible prowess returning, the vanaras made loud noises out of joy and desire to wage war.'

'Tumultuous war took place between Vanaras and Rakshasas, striking one another, monkeys with terrible trees and Rakshasas with tridents and clubs.'

'Fierce Rakshasas mowed down the Vanaras all over and even the Vanaras pulled down Rakshasas to the ground with trees.'

'Highly enraged Rakshasas on their part fixed the Vanaras with sharp dreadful arrows with itching feathers.'

'The Vanaras although strong were wielding maces, spikes, tridents, terrific iron bars and multitude of weapons of many kinds to crush the Rakshasas. They were endowed with prowess, knowledgeable of weapons and doing their duty without fear and with great enthusiasm.'

"Vanaras 's bodies split in their necks by the terrible tridents, took up trees and rocks to fight."

'The monkeys endowed with terrific speed, proceeding from there roaring, proclaiming their names crushed the Rakshasa heroes.'

'Wonderful fight took place between Vanaras and Rakshasas who held trees and rocks of several kinds.'

'Vanaras who had conquered fear crushed Rakshasas into lumps of flesh indeed the Rakshasas threw out blood from their mouths.'

'Some tore by the sides of the body, some crushed by the trees, some powdered by the rocks, and some were torn into pieces with teeth.'

'Indeed, the night rangers were killed, their flags were broken. They were crushed, their swords were destroyed with chariots fallen.'

'By the Vanaras hurling from the mountains, the crushed elephants were like mountains and the horses with riders crushed covered the ground all over.'

'The Vanaras with their terrific valour jumping up wounded the Rakshasas in their face with their sharp nails.'

'Some others with pale faces and dishevelled hair lost senses due to rolling in blood dropped on the ground.'

'Other Rakshasas of terrific valour, extremely enraged, hit the monkeys with their palms which were hard as diamond to touch.'

'Endowed with speed, the Vanaras also fell on the Rakshasas at greater speed, knocking them down with fists, feet, teeth and even trees.'

'Dhumraksha, the bull among the Rakshasas seeing the army distressed and running away, being eager to fight began to cause havoc to the Vanaras.'

'Few Vanaras mutilated by barbed darts, some struck with mallets, blood oozing dropped down.'

'Some were pound by iron bars, some were torn up, some split and some pierced and cut ceased in life.'

'In the battlefield some Vanaras, attacked by Rakshasas, were floating on the ground in blood, dead.'

'Some with their hearts open and broken, beaten on side laid detached of their inner parts.'

'The monkeys and Rakshasa groups took part in a fierce fight with rocks and trees abounding loud noise.'

'It seemed like music in the form of twang of bow strings, neighing of horses like the sound of wooden cymbals, vocal music in the form of trumpeting of elephants, that battle seemed like symphony.'

'Dhumraksha with his bow in hand, showering arrows, laughing in battlefront dispersed the Vanaras in directions.'

'Beholding the perturbed army, Hanuman seized a huge rock and turned towards Dhumraksha.'

'Endowed with mighty valour equal to his father, an angry Hanuman hurled the rock at the chariot of Dhumraksha.'

'Beholding the rock descending upon him, Dhumraksha rushed instantly on the ground from the chariot and stood.'

'That rock fell on the chariot and got crushed along with its wheel and axle and with arrows.'

'Hanuman the son of WindGod in that way started destroying the chariot and the Rakshasa with tree trunks and stems.'

'Some Rakshasas hit by trees with their heads broken, shedding blood fell on the ground.'

'Hanuman the son of WindGod, after chasing the army of Rakshasas reaching the top of the mountain, jumped on Dhumraksha.'

'Lifting his mace on seeing Hanuman, heroic and brave Dhumraksha darted on Hanuman, roaring like a lion.'

'And then lifting his mace fixed with many nails, Dhumraksha enraged lighted on Hanuman.'

"That fierce mace fell on Hanuman's head. Hanuman who was equal to wind god without caring for the hit dropped the peak of the mountain on the centre of Dhumraksha's head."

'By the falling of the peak of the mountain on Dhumraksha, all his limbs broken to pieces and crushed fell on the ground like a mountain.'

'Those Rakshasas who survived the onslaught, seeing Dhumraksha killed, reentered Lanka out of fear of being killed by Vanaras.'

'The son of wind god, the great soul, having killed the enemy in the battlefield and making the river of blood to flow, was exhausted by killing enemies. The monkeys started worshipping him in joy.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेद्विपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fifty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"The Lord of Rakshasas was overcome with anger on hearing about Dhumraksha's death. He was hissing like a serpent, heaving a deep burning sigh, for having done a dirty task. He spoke to cruel Vajradamshtra of mighty prowess."

"The Lord of Rakshasas was overcome with anger on hearing about Dhumraksha's death. He was hissing like a serpent, heaving a deep burning sigh, for having done a dirty task. He spoke to cruel Vajradamshtra of mighty prowess."

'"O Hero, proceed, accompanied by Rakshasa companions and kill Dasaratha\'s Rama and Sugriva along with Vanaras."'

'The king of Rakshasas, being a deceit, having spoken in that way, many generals of the army went accompanied by elephants, horses, camels, and donkeys with chariots decorated with banners and pennons, and diadems collected together.'

'Thereafter adorned with wonderful crowns studded with keyura gems, wearing a co at covering the body with bow in hand went alert.'

'The general went ascending the chariot shining with well polished shining gold, decked with flags after going around clockwise.'

'Armed with swords, many foot soldiers carrying poles, strange clubs, tridents, iron bars, slings and roped to throw spears and spears with sharp edges, swords, battle axes, javelins, and maces, departed.'

'All the Rakshasa leaders decorated with lovely raiment, glowing, the heroes moved like mountains. They seemed like elephants intoxicated with ichor.'

'Carrying tridents, clubs, and goads eager for war the Rakshasas mounted on mahouts and horses of noble characteristics, warriors with extraordinary might departed.'

'Then the entire Rakshasa army determined with a purpose roaring like clouds of the rainy season it looked splendid and crossed over the southern gate where Angada was stationed.'

'As they were leaving evil portents appeared. Dreadful jackals, dazzling fire from the sky and meteors falling appeared.'

'Then the fierce animals indicated the death of Rakshasas, who were going deluded with war and fell down.'

'Mighty Vajradamshtra who was energetic, picking up courage seeing the portents that came up, sallied forth eager for war.'

'Vanaras who assumed victory, seeing the Rakshasas coming out stretching filled all the ten directions with loud noise.'

'Then dreadful encounters of fierce form took place between Vanaras and Rakshasas each one trying to kill another.'

'Proceeding Further, very eager to fight they fell on the ground with their bodies broken, heads severed, and all limbs bathed in blood.'

'Heroes in war whose hand s were like iron clubs, who never turned back in war, indeed flung weapons of many kinds on one another.'

'There, a very loud fearful noise was heard which pierced the hearts in the battlefield, that was produced by the striking of weapons with trees and rocks.'

'Then came out tumultuous sounds of clutter of chariots, bows, conches, kettle drums and tom toms.'

'Indeed, abandoning the weapons, the Vanaras fought with their palms, fists, feet, trees, and knees and smashed the Rakshasas crushing their bodies like rocks.'

'Vajradamshtra went about in the battle striking Vanaras just like death goes with a noose for destruction of the world.'

'Mighty Vajradamshtra, who was endowed with the skill of using every kind of weapon, deluded with anger, went after the Vanara army.'

"Seeing the Vanaras being destroyed, Vali's son, Angada with redoubled anger, like fire at the time of universal destruction, started to exterminate Rakshasas."

'Heroic Angada, equal to Indra in prowess, enraged, eyes turned red in anger, seizing a tree made a fierce fight with Rakshasa army like a lion with small animals.'

'There, struck by Angada of fearful valour, the Rakshasas fell like trees smashed and heads broken.'

'Then the wonderful chariots, flags, horses, Vanaras and Rakshasas bodies bathed in blood fell on the ground looked fearful.'

'The battlefield with strewn armlets, necklaces and clothes, weapons looked like autumnal night decorated all over.'

'Vajradamshtra, the mighty Rakshasa became enraged with the destruction of his army and victory of Angada.'

"Stretching his terrific bow which had the splendour of Indra's bow he (Vajradamshtra) showered shafts at the army troops of Vanaras and assailed them."

'Seated firmly on the chariots the chiefs and heroes of Rakshasas also fought steadily with different weapons in the combat.'

'The best of Vanara warriors also gathered together with rocks in hand contended.'

'Then in that battle the Rakshasas went on hurling thousands of missiles at the chiefs of Vanaras.'

'Heroic Vanaras who resembled elephants in rut showered mountains and trees and huge rocks at Rakshasas.'

'Between the heroes fighting the battle, who never returned, Great War continued between Rakshasas troops and Vanaras.'

'There lay strewn some monkeys and Rakshasas also with severed heads, broken feet, with many weapons mangled with bodies, bathed in blood, arms and feet looped to necks devolving as prey to buzzards, vultures and crows surrounded.'

'Then in the battlefield, the timid vanaras and even rakshasas with their arms and heads cut off, bodies wounded allover dropped down.'

'Thereafter Rakshasas were killed by Vanaras as Vajradamshtra kept looking at them and the Rakshasas ran from there.'

"Struck by monkeys the Rakshasas were in fear. Seeing the Rakshasas Vajraddamshtra's eyes turned red in anger with bow in hand penetrating the Vanara troops terrifying them."

'Valiant Vajradamshtra became very furious and pierced with arrows of plumes of buzzard which never missed target in seven, eight, nine and five Vanaras at a time.'

'Struck with fear the Vanaras sought the protection of Angada just as people seek protection of Brahma, the creator of beings.'

'Then the son of Vali gazing at the broken monkeys looking at Vajradamshtra in anger, faced himself.'

'Vajradamshtra and Angada both enraged and strode among Rakshasas and monkeys and fought like a lion and intoxicated elephant.'

'Then Angada endowed with great strength, pierced Vajradamshtra in his private parts with clubs used for piercing elephants.'

'Angada who was endowed with great strength all his limbs bathed in blood and terrific valour took hold of a huge tree and shattered Vajradamshtra.'

'That Rakshasa (Vajradamshtra) seeing the tree coming towards him was not bewildered. He shattered it into pieces, and it fell on the ground.'

'The bull among monkeys, Angada seeing the valour of Vajradamshtra seizing a huge hillock hurled at the Rakshasa making loud sounds and breaking.'

'The valiant Rakshasa who was not perplexed with mace in hand leaping down the chariot looking (at the hillock hurled) sat on the ground.'

'The hillock discharged by Angada went right in the forefront of the battle and shattered the chariot along with its wheels and pole.'

'Then Angada seized a huge hillock adorned with trees hurled at Vajradamshtra.'

'Vajradamshtra vomiting blood became unconscious and clasping his mace breathing heavily he remained senseless for a while.'

'The night ranger regained his senses, extremely angry, stood firmly and attacked Angada, son of Vali on his chest with his mace.'

'Then leaving off the mace, a dual fight started there between one another, the monkeys, and Rakshasas.'

'Exhausted by strain both very valiant fought like planets Angaraka and Budha and spit out blood.'

'Then highly energetic, bull among Vanaras, Angada, uprooting a tree full of many flowers and fruits stood there.'

'(The Rakshasa seized) a huge bright sword, a shield decorated with tiny bells and sword encased in hide sheath.'

'Then desiring victory both monkey and Rakshasa struck one another passionately in wonderful harsh ways.'

'Their wounds streaming blood, exhausted in the battlefield, when they rested on their knees on the ground, they were like charming Kimsuka blossoms.'

'Angada, the elephant among the monkeys rose up in the mere twinkling of eyes, like a serpent struck by staff glowing in his eyes.'

"Mighty son of Vali lopped off the great head of Vajradamshtra's with a sharpened stainless sword."

"His (Vajradamshtra's) limbs bathed in blood, cut off by sword, eyeballs rolling cleft into two dropped down."

'Deluded with fear, the Rakshasas seeing Vajradamshtra killed by monkeys, panic stricken, heads bent in shame, faces woebegone fled to Lanka.'

'Mighty son of Vali, having killed Vajradamshtra, honoured in the midst of great Vanara army was joyful surrounded like the thousand eyed Indra, the Lord of gods.', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुःपञ्चाशस्सर्गः', 'This is the end of the fifty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"On hearing about Vajradamshtra being killed by Vali's son, Ravana spoke to the chief of the army who stood with folded hands."

'"Send for Akampana quickly, who is of terrific valour, difficult to encounter and skilled in all sastras."'

'Akampana is a tamer of foes, protector of people, in that way capable, always desirous of welfare, lover of war.'

'"Scorcher of enemies, this Akampana will win Sugriva of terrific might, Rama and Lakshmana, dreadful Vanaras, and put an end to enemies."'

"Then accepting Ravana's order, accordingly, taking hold of the army dispatched them."

'Thereafter taking different weapons, Rakshasas of fearful eyes and terrific appearance rushed forward ordered by CommanderinChief of the army.'

'Mounted on a huge chariot, Akampana, decked in pure gold jewels, like cloud in form and complexion, whose loud voice resembled thunder, surrounded by Rakshasas went forward.'

'Akampana who, possibly could not be shaken in war by suras shone like the sun in that manner.'

'As Akampana was going forth excited to wage war, an expression of desperation developed suddenly in the horses drawing the chariots and an experience of depression in him.'

'Himself being a lover of war, became pale with his countenance changed, voice choked, and his eyes lost its lustre.'

'At a time on a good day of fine weather, it became cloudy, birds and beasts were making frightening cries all over.'

'He whose shoulders were developed like that of a lion, who equalled tiger in valour, went forth not minding the evil portents.'

'While that Akampana was going like that along with Rakshasas huge noise that arose was as if the ocean was agitated.'

'Huge troops of Vanaras holding trees and hillocks stood prepared for waging and by that the noise that arose expanded.'

'Vanaras and Rakshasas dedicated their lives for Rama and Ravana, respectively in that way were enraged and battle took place.'

'Intending to kill one another both Vanaras and Rakshasas who resembled hills, also of extraordinary might and heroic fighting.'

'A tremendous sound thundered in that war when they fought with exceeding impetuosity with one another and yelled at each other.'

'Terrific dust of red colour arose instantly in all the ten directions by the Vanaras, and Rakshasas and it enveloped all over.'

'The combatants could not see one another in the battlefield, and it seemed as though white silk piece was shaken by the wind by the appearance of the surrounding dust.'

'By the dust raised, the posts, flags, shields and not even horses, weapons and chariots were visible.'

'As they were rushing over one another, terrific noise was heard, and no form was discernible.'

'Then in that darkness and in anger Vanaras went attacking Vanaras and Rakshasas also attacked Rakshasas (not knowing).'

'Not knowing enemies and own people the Vanaras and Rakshasas terminating drenched the mud with their blood and covered the earth.'

'Then moistened with blood, the dust settled on the ground was seen covered with bodies and limbs.'

'Then Rakshasas and Vanaras fought one another vigorously with trees, javelins, maces, darts, rocks, and peaks.'

'The Vanaras of terrific deeds, like hills in form, resembling iron bars attacked many Rakshasas in the battle.'

'There, the highly furious Rakshasas also exterminated the Vanaras with their weapons and darts.'

'Highly enraged Akampana of fierce valour cheered all the Rakshasa troops.'

'Even the Vanaras mangled Rakshasas countering with weapons, huge rocks and trees and destroyed them.'

'In the meantime, in the midst Kumuda, Nala, Mainda, heroic vanaras became furious and went'

'Great heroes of the Vanara leaders, chiefs of army sportively waged a great battle and crushed Rakshasas repeatedly.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fifty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Observing the great action and accomplishment of the foremost Vanaras in the battle, Akampana exhibited violent anger.'

'Looking at the deeds of enemies, deluded with violent anger, Akampana spoke these words holding the bow and looking at the charioteer.'

'"O Charioteer, quickly drive the chariot to that place where many Rakshasas are destroyed in the battle."'

'"Those Vanaras are mighty and terribly angry. They are using trees and hillocks as weapons. Take me where chiefs are standing."'

'"I wish to see the end of Vanaras who boast of their warfare. The entire Rakshasa army is destroyed by them."'

'Then Akampana seated in the chariot drawn by fast moving horses, assailed the Vanaras with a network of arrows.'

"The Vanaras could not counter or stand nor fight in battle. What to say more? Shattered by Akampana's arrows, they all took to their heels."

'Having observed that Vanaras are fallen under the sway of Akampana and under the sway of death, mighty Hanuman approached Akampana.'

'Seeing the great monkey, the Vanara troops got together and surrounded him.'

'Seeing Hanuman, the monkey leaders took their shelter under him, got established firmly and became strong.'

'On Akampana, who was well established like a mountain, mighty Hanuman showered torrents of arrows like Indra showered rain.'

'Mighty Hanuman unmindful of the volley of arrows pierced in his body thought in his mind only about the destruction of Akampana.'

'Hanuman, the highly energetic son of Maruthi laughing, sprung up causing the earth to shake and rushed to that Rakshasa.'

'As he roared, his brilliance was blazing, his form was burning and became formidable for others to be at him.'

'Vanara leader himself knowing that he is without any weapon, full of anger took up a mountain quickly.'

'He, the heroic Maruthi, with one hand alone taking a huge mountain whirled round making loud noises.'

'Then he went to Akampana and tormented him just as Indra did with his thunderbolt to Namuchi.'

'Seeing the peak of the mountain uplifted, Akampana also discharged halfmoon shaped great arrows from a distance.'

"Hanuman seeing the peak of the mountain broken into pieces by Rakshasa's arrows and fallen was deluded with anger."

'He (Hanuman) filled with pride and anger quickly uprooted an Aswakarana tree as huge as a mountain and held it.'

'He (Hanuman) endowed with great splendour, seizing a huge trunk of Aswakarana tree with great delight, whirled it round on the ground laughing.'

'Highly enraged Hanuman was running at high speed that his feet were seen breaking the trees and cleaving the earth.'

'Hanuman struck the mahouts, elephants, similarly the chariots and riders of chariots as well as the terrific Rakshasas who fought standing on feet.'

'Hanuman, enraged like the spirit of death, took their life (Rakshasas) armed with trees and on seeing him the Rakshasas took to their heels.'

'The heroic Akampana saw Hanuman coming towards him very angry. Fearing Hanuman, the Rakshasas ran roaring in fear.'

'With fourteen pointed powerful arrows, Akampana tormented and split the body of Hanuman.'

'Valiant Hanuman, even though interrupted several times with rain of arrows, stood still like a mountain full of trees.'

'The gigantic Hanuman, exceedingly valiant and courageous one shone like a fully blossomed Ashoka tree, resembled smokeless fire.'

'Then Hanuman performed another supreme deed by uprooting a tree and striking on the head of Akampana, the chief of Rakshasas.'

'Reacting in anger the great Vanara chief struck the Rakshasa with a tree, by which the Rakshasa fell down dead.'

'Seeing Akampana lying dead on the ground, the Rakshasas were shaken like the trees in the earthquake and were distressed.'

'Abandoning weapons, all Rakshasas having been defeated, chased by the Vanaras, frightened, ran away into Lanka.'

'Perplexed, broken hearted, defeated, hair loosened the Rakshasas sweating all over their limbs, sighing heavily ran away very fast.'

'Again, and again looking back in fear, covertly, bewildered, crushing one another, they went into the Lanka city.'

'Those Rakshasas, endowed with prowess, on entering Lanka got together and paid respects to Hanuman.'

'Hanuman also who was richly endowed with goodness greatly honoured all the Vanaras accordingly.'

'In an atmosphere of triumph, the monkeys sportively shouted again saying that they are willing to give up their life also.'

'Great Vanara, Maruti shone like a triumphant hero and saviour in front of the army, just as Lord Vishnu, the Lord of Devatas shone after killing the foes (demons).'

'Thereafter Rama with the army of Devatas, Atibala and Lakshmana, in the same way Sugriva, the army chief, so also, Vibheeshana of exceeding might praised Hanuman.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषटपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fifty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'The king of Rakshasas hearing about the death of Akampana, was pale and a little angry and looked at his ministers.'

'Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, reflected for a while and deliberated with his ministers and proceeded in the forenoon to inspect all posts in Lanka.'

'Ravana saw Lanka guarded by the Rakshasa army, surrounded by many posts, with flags, posts, and pennants.'

'Ravana, the Lord of Rakshasas seeing the city besieged, spoke to Prahastha who was skilled in warfare for his welfare.'

'"I am not able to see anyone (other than you) knowledgeable in warfare to deliver the city oppressed suddenly and can liberate from war."'

'"Either myself or Kumbhakarna, or my CommanderinChief, or you, or Indrajith, or Nikumbha can undertake such a burden."'

'"Therefore, quickly get ready with the army and take charge for conquering the vanaras collected there."'

'As soon as you go there surely the unsettled Vanara army will run away hearing the uproar and loud noise of Rakshasas.'

'"Vanaras, who are fickle minded, undisciplined and volatile, will not endure the roar of lions of glowing Rakshasas."'

'"Prahastha! Knowing your strength, the helpless Vanaras will surely run away and along with Saumithri. Rama will fall into your power."'

'"If uncertain death comes it is good, not when it comes by not encountering. Think what is acceptable to you and what is not acceptable to you and that is acceptable to me."'

'Prahastha, the CommanderinChief having heard Ravana, replied to the king of Rakshasas just as the preceptor of Rakshasas spoke to Bali.'

'"O king! This was deliberated with capable ministers earlier, is it not It was reviewed with one another, and controversy arose."'

'"If Sita is given away it is beneficial and if not given war is foreseen is known to us."'

'"You have always given me gifts, many honours and praises earlier and worshipped me. When time comes why will I not do"'

'"I do not need to protect my life, sons, wives and wealth also. I am willing to give up my life also in war for you. You will see."'

'Prahastha, having submitted to his king Ravana in that way, the CommanderinChief of the army commanded the army that stood before him.'

'"Get the great Rakshasa army together with me to the battlefield speedily. By my arrows all the carnivorous birds will be killed and satisfied with the flesh (of Vanaras) today", said Prahastha.'

'As soon as the commander in chief ordered in that way, the Rakshasa troops mobilized in the abode of Rakshasas.'

'In a short while the whole of Lanka was filled with elephant size Rakshasa warriors gathered with different kinds of weapons.'

'A fragrant breeze blew past there with Rakshasas propitiating fire god, with offerings and by the worshipping of brahmins the air was pleasant filled with the fragrance of ghee and flowers.'

'Then the Rakshasas rejoiced, wishing victory, consecrated military material with chanting and wore flower garland s.'

'Wearing bows and shields, looking at and greeting the king Ravana, they swiftly surrounded Prahastha.'

'Taking leave of the king and causing terrific sound of blowing of drums, Prahastha, ascended, laughing on to a splendorous chariot, equipped to fight, driven by horses endowed with good speed and capable charioteer, sounding like a thundering cloud, shining like the sun and moon, with a sign of serpent on flag, provided with a wooden fence for defence, which was difficult to collide, covered with gold net.'

'Then, by the order of Ravana, Prahastha set out immediately and departed from Lanka taking a se at in the chariot, surrounded by the great army.'

'As the CommanderinChief was going there arose sounds of kettle drums, blasts of fanfares, and noise of blasts of conchs filling the earth was heard.'

'Rakshasas of fierce appearance, of huge body size, making dreadful sounds went marching ahead of Prahastha.'

'Naranthaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada, Samunnatha, the adjutants of Prahastha went with him.'

'He, emerged from the eastern gate, surrounded by a huge, formidable army formed into a battlearray, which resembled a herd of elephants.'

'Prahastha emerged in rage surrounded by his forces which was like an ocean that resembled Kala (time spirit), Anthaka (death) and Yama (God of death).'

'By the sounds of roaring that emerged at the departure of the Rakshasas all beings of Lanka shrieked in unnatural ways.'

'The birds living on flesh and blood reached the sky and circled anticlockwise around the chariot.'

'A meteor fell from the sky, the wind blew violently. Jackals howled vomiting tongues of fire.'

'The planets clashing with one another did not shine. The clouds were violent like donkeys and rained blood on top of the chariot and the marching Rakshasas drenched.'

'Seeing a vulture sitting on the banner (of Prahastha) facing south scratching both sides, Prahastha became pale as if the entire prosperity had been snatched away.'

'A charioteer and knower of controlling the horses, the whip slipped many times from his hand.'

'The splendour of Prahastha which is difficult to destroy, disappeared at that moment and the horses stumbled on even ground.'

'Seeing Prahastha, who is well known for his valour coming towards, for war with various weapons, the monkey army stood facing.'

'And when the monkeys took hold of heavy rocks and trees for fighting exceedingly tumultuous clamor arose.'

'The yelling noise of Rakshasas and roaring noise of Vanaras of both armies, who were powerful and seized with speed, who sought the destruction of one another, challenging noises of Rakshasas and Vanaras, highly rejoiced, was heard.'

'Thereafter, perverted Prahastha entered into that army of monkey king grown immensely, to conquer the army, just as moth enters into flame, being at the point of death.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेसप्तपञ्चाशस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fifty seventh sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Then Rama seeing Prahastha, the tamer of enemies of terrific valour coming towards him, said to Vibheeshana, having a gentle smile.'

'"Oh, Broad shouldered Vibheeshana! Who is this Rakshasa of gigantic form coming surrounded by a great army He seems to be a valiant one. Tell me."'

'On hearing Raghava\'s words Vibheeshana replied." He is a Rakshasa, by name Prahastha, commander in chief of the army of Rakshasa king. He is widely known for his prowess, conversant with weapons and courageous. He is heroic and a third of the army of Ravana is under his command."'

'The huge army of powerful Vanaras saw Prahastha of terrific prowess, fierce, surrounded by Rakshasas coming towards them roaring.'

'The Rakshasas rushing towards Vanaras seeking victory, seizing swords, javelins, double edged swords, pikes, mallets, maces, iron bars, spears and bows of different kinds shone brightly.'

'The Vanaras burning with desire to fight, for their part went with huge trees in bloom, huge and long rocks.'

'Each of them approached one another with showers of rocks and many arrows and by that a great war happened.'

'In the course of war many Rakshasas killed many Vanara leaders and many Vanaras killed many Rakshasas also.'

'Indeed, some were killed by Rakshasas with pikes, some by javelins, a few with iron bars, and a few were hacked with axes.'

'Few got cut and deprived of life and fell on the ground. Some struck by arrows had their hearts broken into pieces.'

'Few Vanaras cut into two by Rakshasas fell down and few Vanaras fell on the ground sides of the body cleft ceased life.'

"Then the highly enraged Vanaras completely crushed Rakshasas in groups by crushing them on the earth's surface with trees and mountain peaks."

'Hit by fists and hands that had the impact of thunderbolt, teeth and eyes smashed and fallen out, the Rakshasas vomited blood from their mouth excessively.'

'Tumultuous noise like the roar of lions arose in the battlefield with Vanaras and Rakshasas cries of pain.'

'Following the path of heroes and infuriated, their eyes reeling, the vanaras and rakshasas carried out their deeds without fear.'

'Naranthaka, Kumbhahanu, Mahanada, Samunnata, all these associates of Prahastha made short work of the monkeys.'

'Rushing at great speed, the Rakshasas and also killing the Vanaras in that way, Dwivida alone struck down Naranthaka with a mountain peak.'

'Dhurmukha monkey uprooting a huge tree holding it in hand killed the Rakshasa Samunnata.'

'Energetic Jambavantha, enraged, took a huge rock, and hurled at the chest of Mahanada who fell down.'

'And thereafter, valiant Tara closed with Kumbhahanu and attacked him with a tree on the head and he lost his life.'

'Then intolerant of the exploit, Prahastha got on to the chariot with bow in hand and caused dreadful havoc among the monkeys.'

'Then the sound of both armies was like an agitated, boundless ocean, whirling round and frightening.'

'In that major conflict, highly furious Prahastha, an expert in war tormented the Vanaras with a stream of arrows.'

'The bodies of Vanaras and Rakshasas strewn on the ground, seemed like mountains had fallen.'

'That battlefield drenched with blood shone bright as though veiled with blossoms of Palasa in the month of Magha.'

'Heaps of slain leaders as banks, broken weapons like large trees, torrents of blood as vast stretch of water, liver and spleens as its mire, scattered entrails as duckweeds, severed trunks and heads as fish, fingers and parts of limbs as grass, crowded with swans in the form of vultures, frequented with cranes in the shape of buzzards, overspread with f at in the form of foam, groans of the wounded for its murmur, difficult to cross for cowards, frequented by swans and cranes, that battlefield of river flowed. The Rakshasas and Vanaras swam across the river even though it were difficult to cross as leaders of elephant herds would cross a lotus pond covered with pollen of lotuses.'

'Further Nila saw Prahastha seated and trembling and discharging a volley of arrows with vehemence exterminating monkeys.'

'Prahastha, the commander of the army darted, just as the violent wind blows away mass of clouds, observing Nila coming towards him, in his chariot which was bright as the sun.'

'Prahastha, the CommanderinChief of the army, supreme among wielders of bow, stretched his best bow and drew it and began to discharge arrows at Neela.'

"The arrows discharged by Prahastha, penetrated piercing into Nila's body at great speed like infuriated serpents and went straight into the earth."

'Great Vanara, a valiant one, Nila having been hit with arrows sharp as tongues of fire, struck Prahastha, who is most difficult to encounter and rushing towards him by uprooting a tree.'

'Having been struck by Nila, the Rakshasa leader became furious, and began to roar and showered rain arrows on the monkeys.'

'Not able to check the volley of arrows released by the Rakshasa, Nila received them with closed eyes.'

'Just as a mighty bull faces sudden downpour of autumnal rain, in the same way Nila precisely tolerated the rain of arrows of Prahastha, which are difficult to face, with eyes closed.'

'Neela endowed with great prowess, became angry (by the rain of arrows showered on him) and hurled a huge Sala tree at Prahastha.'

'Thereupon, Neela firmly holding the bow of mighty Prahastha broke it again and again and roared'

'Deprived of bow and chariot, Prahastha, the CommanderinChief seizing a terrific mallet jumped down from the chariot.'

'Both Nila and Prahastha, deadly enemies, CommanderinChief of the armies, their limbs disfigured, wetted with blood, stood like elephants.'

'Tearing up each other with exceedingly sharp teeth they were behaving like a lion and tiger. They had won many wars and never turned back in war. They were heroes like Vrta and Indra desiring to conquer and attain fame.'

'Then Prahastha struck speedily with a mallet and hit Neela on the forehead and blood flowed from there.'

'Then drenched with blood, Neela was enraged and took hold of a huge tree and hurled at the chest of Prahastha.'

'He (Prahastha), not caring for the wound, taking a huge mallet went towards that courageous monkey (Neela).'

'Then, seeing Prahastha waging and coming towards him, the great monkey, Neela, endowed with high speed threw a huge rock.'

"Fighting with the mallet, Neela quickly dropped the rock on that Prahastha's forehead"

'Hurled by Neela, the foremost of monkeys, the huge rock broke the head of Prahastha into pieces.'

'Life, splendour, strength, and senses departed Prahastha fell instantly on the ground like a tree cut at the bottom.'

'From his shattered head much blood flowed from all over the body just as a spring from a mountain.'

'Prahastha having been killed by Neela, the cheerless Rakshasas and unshakeable troops could not stay there any more.'

'The CommanderinChief having been killed the troops could not remain there just as water reached a breached dam.'

'CommanderinChief killed, those Rakshasas reduced to speechlessness went to the abode of their Lord and remained without consciousness.'

'Commander in chief of the Rakshasa army killed by Neela, the bull of Vanaras, the army Rakshasas with dreadful weapons which were like the fury of an ocean, ran.'

'Having gone to the king of Rakshasas, the survivors said, "Prahastha is killed by the son of fire god." Thereafter, the king of Rakshasas fell prey to anger.'

"Even as Rakshasas revealed about Prahastha's death, tormented by grief and anger Ravana spoke to Rakshasa troops just as Indra spoke to celestial troops."

'"No low opinion to be entertained with regard to an enemy by whom my commander in chief of the army was killed, who is capable of killing the army of Indra with his followers and elephants."'

'"I shall go myself without thinking to that wonderful battle scene and put an end to the enemy and succeed."'

'"Now I will go and burn up that army of Vanaras along with Lakshmana and Rama with the stream of my arrows just as forest fire without the use of fire."'

'Ravana, the enemy of the king of Devatas, having spoken like that ascended a chariot yoked to the best of horses, shining by virtue of its form (golden) and luminous like fire.'

'As the foremost king of the Rakshasas went forth, a blast of sounds of conchs, beat of drums and clapping of arms and the roaring sounds followed by the chanting of auspicious verses sung by the Rakshasas eulogizing and honouring the king highly.'

'The Rakshasa king surrounded by Rakshasas who resembled mountains and clouds in form seemed like Rudra surrounded by asuras.'

'Thereafter, Ravana possessed with great splendour stopped at the city and saw the army of Vanaras collected together looking like an ocean of clouds wielding trees and rocks.'

'Rama, whose arms were like the king of serpents, shining with splendour, followed by army, seeing the army of Rakshasas exceedingly furious, spoke to Vibheeshana the foremost of the wielder of weapons.'

'"Under whose command is this unshakeable army with several kinds of flags, posts and weapons armed with missiles, tridents, swords spikes and darts, with elephants the size of Mahendra mountain"'

'Thereupon, Vibheeshana, equal to Indra in valour, on hearing the great soul Rama, revealed about the Rakshasa army endowed with great strength.'

'"O King! the one seated on the elephant, by whose weight the elephant head is shaking, whose coppery face is like the rising sun, a gigantic one is Akampana."'

'"The one on the chariot, distinguished by the sign of a lion, and making sound with his bow, splendid as Indra\'s bow with terrific teeth projected forward looks like an elephant, eminent by virtue of the boons bestowed is Indrajith by name."'

'"He who resembles Vindhya Mountain in the west (where the sun sets) and the Mahendra mountain (in size) seated on the chariot, is a great chariotwarrior, a hero unequalled in size, wielding a bow whose body is grown out of size, who is coming in sight is by name Atikaya."'

'"He whose eyes are coppery red in anger, who rides on elephant resembles the beating of bells, roars in harsh tone are a great courageous one by the name Mahodara."'

'"He who is mounted on horses decorated with gold shining, like a mountain crowned with cloud, radiant as the Sun holding the shining yokes coming at high speed is by name Pisacha."'

'"He who comes firmly shining like lightning, surpassing thunderbolt in speed, seizing a trident, riding a Lordly bull shining like a mountain is the famous Trisira."'

'"There comes Kumbha whose form is like a cloud in form, whose chest is fleshy and broad. He is fully prepared, coming with a sign of the king of serpents (Vasuki) stretching his bow."'

'"There comes Nikumbha, studded with gold and diamonds, shining and smoky, who is the chief of Rakshasa army seizing an iron club, is capable of wonderful and terrific deeds."'

'Again, comes Naranthaka, with multitude of swords and arrows, mounted on top of a chariot with flags, blazing like fire, who fights with mountain peaks.'

'"One who is surrounded by several hideous forms, like heads of tigers, camels, Lordly elephants and horses, rolling eyes, just as Rudra by his attendants, who is surrounded by Rakshasas and is humbled by the pride of even Devatas, over him shines the white canopy resembling the moon with slender ribs is the king of Rakshasas."'

'"There is the king of Rakshasas shining like Sun, whose countenance shines with hanging earrings, of terrible form like the Himalayas and Vindhya, who has humbled the pride of Mahendra and Yama."'

'Then Rama the scourge of enemies replied Vibheeshana, "Oh! Ravana! King of Rakshasas is endowed with luminous glory."'

'"Ravana blazing like the sun is difficult to gaze even. His shine is spread all over and not perceptible to discern."'

'Among the Devas and Danavas such brilliance is not there. He shines so brightly.'

'"The great warriors of Ravana fighting in war are like mountains and all fought with mountains and glowing weapons."'

'"The Rakshasa king is surrounded by sharp, furious beings of terrible valour shining like the god of death."'

'"By his good luck, this sinful one has come under my sight. I will give vent to my wrath born of Sita\'s abduction."'

'Indomitable Rama having spoken in that manner, followed by Lakshmana got ready and took out an excellent bow and stood.'

'There upon the great soul, the king of Rakshasas thus spoke to the strong army of Rakshasas, "Fully complacent, free from any apprehension be stationed at the gates and the buildings of the four main streets."'

'"Coming to know that I am here with you, this side, considering it to be a weak point, the forest dwellers may enter the vacant city and Devastate all united."'

'After the counsellors departed from there Ravana pierced through the ocean of Vanaras just as gigantic fish would pierce in the sea.'

'Watching Ravana advancing suddenly on the battlefield with great speed, Sugriva took a huge mountain top and went towards Rakshasa king.'

'Seizing mountain tops whose slopes were filled with trees Sugriva hurled at the night rangers. Watching this Ravana quickly broke them with his arrows fixed with golden shafts.'

'After that slope covered with excellent trees had fallen on the ground and broken, Ravana got readied with an arrow as if for arranging destruction like the spirit of death.'

'Seizing an arrow which shone like sparks of fire and had the speed of wind, nay vied with thunderbolt of Indra in speed, he (Ravana) released an arrow in anger.'

"That arrow released from Ravana's arm, which was hard and sharp as the thunderbolt of Indra, pierced Sugriva just as the sharp thorn edged spear of Guha penetrated Krauncha mountain."

'That hero (Sugriva) hurt by the arrow lost senses and fell on the ground groaning in the battlefield. Seeing that the Rakshasas shouted joyfully overtaken by evil spirits.'

'Thereafter Gavaksha, Gavaya, Sudamshtra, Rshaba, Jyothimukha and Nala increasing their body size rushed towards the king of Rakshasas.'

'The Rakshasa Lord made the mountain peaks useless by the hundreds of arrows released by him. The streams of arrows with golden shafts could resist the Rakshasas and strike the Vanara king.'

'The Vanara leaders of fierce form torn by the streams of sharp arrows discharged in the three directions fell covering the ground.'

'Those monkeys struck and fallen by the piercing of arrows shrieking went to seek refuge from Rama.'

'The great soul Rama who was holding a bow went seizing it. Lakshmana approached him immediately with folded hands and addressed Rama with words consonant with truth.'

'"I will exterminate the evil minded Ravana. Oh! noble brother, may I be permitted to complete the task"'

'Sri Rama, who was highly energetic and truthful in enthusiasm to succeed, told Lakshmana, "You go and be careful in the battle."'

'"Ravana is a great hero in the battlefield. His valour in war is wonderful. He is angry but none can withstand him in the three worlds."'

'"Remaining alert, apply your arrows in the direction of his arrows. Looking at his arrows carefully, making an effort to protect yourself, set your bow."'

"On hearing Raghava's words, son of Sumitra embraced him and offered prayers, paying respects sallied forth for the encounter."

'He saw Ravana, endowed with round shoulders like elephant trunks, with fierce bow glowing and the broken bodies of Vanaras spread all over. Ravana was showering nets of arrows and instigating vanaras.'

'The son of the wind god, Hanuman, a brilliant one seeing Ravana, obstructed the stream of arrows and darted towards him.'

'Courageous Hanuman seeing the chariot of Ravana lifting his right arm menacing him spoke these words.'

'"Your life is surely secure from gods, demons, Gandharvas and Yakshas and Rakshasas but you fear Vanaras."'

'"I raised this right arm that way with five branches (five fingers) at you that will expel your subtle self (made up of the five subtle elements) from your body."'

"Ravana of truly fierce valour, hearing Hanuman's words, his eyes became blood red and spoke to Hanuman this way."

'"O Vanara! Go about without any hesitation. Attain the fame of a Vanara hitting Ravana permanently. Thereafter knowing your prowess, I shall put an end to you."'

'Having heard Ravana\'s words, Hanuman said, "Think of your son Akshaya killed by me earlier."'

"Having spoken that way by Hanuman, the Lord of Rakshasas slapped his hand on Hanuman's chest."

'Smacked by him (Ravana), Hanuman, a brilliant and intelligent one stood firm for a while and picking up courage, highly enraged struck the enemy of gods with his palm.'

'Thereupon, struck by the great soul, Vanara, the ten headed Ravana was shaken like the earthquake on the mountain together.'

'Ravana hit by hand in that way in a hard manner, the siddhas, demons as well and even Devatas raised their voice.'

'And thereafter, thus spoke extremely energetic Ravana recovering from breath, "Well done vanara. You are courageous and praiseworthy, my enemy!"'

'Ravana having spoken in that way, Maruti said "Oh Ravana! What a shame on my valour, you survived."'

'"O evil minded one, why do you brag You do this once more I will strike you once again with my fist and send you to the abode of Yama."'

"Consequent to Maruti speaking like that, Ravana's eyes turned red, burning with anger. The powerful Ravana lifted his right fist instantly and brought it down on his powerful enemy."

"Hit on his chest, Hanuman got hurt again and reeled. Seeing Hanuman's power, overcome with fear, the best charioteer Ravana drove quickly towards Neela."

'The ten headed indomitable Lord of Rakshasas with his arrows that resembled serpents, dreadful, capable of piercing into vital parts began to strike at Neela, the leader of monkeys.'

'Pressured by the streams of arrows, the monkey leader, Neela single handed took up a peak of a mountain and hurled at the Lord of Rakshasas.'

'Endowed with a great mind and energetic Hanuman became alert and seeking to fight with Ravana, feeling fresh, enraged, looking at Nila said "It is not correct to attack one who is fighting with another."'

'Ravana, endowed with extraordinary energy attacked that peak hurled by Neela with seven sharp arrows and it fell broken into pieces.'

'On seeing the crushed peak, Neela, the killer of stupendous foes, shone like fire at universal destruction in anger.'

'In the battle Neela hurled Aswakarana, Sala and Mango trees in good bloom and several other trees at Ravana.'

'Ravana broke those trees in return and showered rain of formidable arrows at Neela.'

"When Neela was covered by Ravana's arrows, it was just as clouds cover mountain peaks. Neela reduced his size and landed on top of Ravana's bow."

'Neela stood on top of the post of the bow of Ravana. On seeing that Ravana was burning in anger while Neela roared.'

'Then, when Ravana was unable to release the arrow from the bow on Neela, who was shifting from the top of the post to the crown. Seeing that Lakshmana, Rama and Hanuman were amazed.'

"Ravana endowed with extraordinary energy was also wonder struck at Neela's agility. Then he took up the shining shaft presided over by fire god."

"Thereafter, seeing Neela's feat in the war, Ravana was agitated and the Vanaras were cheerful for having achieved their wish and shouted in joy."

"Provoked by the clamour of the vanaras, Ravana's heart was full of anger and did not know what to do."

'And then the night ranger Ravana taking up, fitting the arrow charged with fire, looked at Neela resting on top of the bow.'

'Ravana endowed with extraordinary energy said, "Oh monkey, you are unfair, very tricky and further deceptive."'

'"Oh monkey! You are taking different forms and doing different deeds. If you have the ability, save your life."'

'"The arrow released by me now is charged with a missile and will destroy your life. You have been protecting (changing your forms) your life."'

'Speaking like that, Ravana, the king of Rakshasas chanting the mantras and fixing the arrow struck the commander in chief (Neela) of the Vanara army.'

'Struck by the arrow propelled by the missile (of Ravana) on the chest, Neela fell on the ground.'

"By virtue of his father's greatness and his own power, his life did not cease but he fell on the ground."

'Finding the vanara unconscious the ten headed Ravana who was eager to fight went towards Saumithri in the chariot making sounds that resembled the sound of rattling of clouds.'

'In the midst of the battlefield stood Ravana, intercepting with his glowing bow making loud sounds as though shaking the earth.'

'Saumithri who was not depressed in spirit (by Ravana\'s attack) addressing Ravana who was stretching his bow said "Oh! Lord of night rangers, Be aware. You ought not to fight with vanaras."'

'Hearing the challenging statement of the king of Rakshasas and hearing the vibrating sound, Saumithri standing close by spoke these wrathful words.'

'"Oh Raghava! You have come under the path of my sight. You are going to meet your end. You who are perverted in mind, struck by a stream of my arrows will reach the abode of death this very moment."'

'Saumithri, not surprised at the screaming of Ravana with his projected teeth, said, "You are great in sinful action. People of great valour do not display such bluster. Do not shout like that."'

'"Your valour, heroism, strength and prowess are known to me. I stand firmly with bow and arrow come on. What is the use of bragging"'

'Lakshmana, having spoken in that manner, the Lord of Rakshasas released seven arrows with beautiful plumes. Lakshmana tore them into pieces with sharp pointed and sharpheaded arrows with gold shafts.'

'Seeing the arrows cut down with force broken pieces like coils of serpents, the Lord of Lanka overtaken by anger let go another sharp arrow.'

'The brother of Rama stretched his bow into a circle and showered rain of piercing arrows. He tore the arrows of his enemy with his arrows Kshura, Ardhachandra, karni and Balan without nay, perturbance.'

"Ravana, the enemy of gods seeing all his streams of arrows ineffective, was astonished at Lakshmana's skill, and let go sharp arrows again and again."

'Lakshmana also, who is comparable to Mahendra, fitting his bow and arrows that shone like fire released sharp and pointed arrows to put an end to Rakshasa king.'

'The Rakshasa king broke into pieces those arrows of Lakshmana and struck him on the forehead with the arrow gifted to him by Brahma, that was bright like the fire at the time of universal destruction.'

"Lakshmana hurt by Ravana's dart, shaken up, seizing the bow feebly with great difficulty regaining consciousness tore the bow of the enemy of Indra into pieces in return."

'Then Lakshmana son of Dasaratha, struck the bow of the king into pieces with three sharp and pointed arrows. The king swooned and recovered with great difficulty.'

'Hurt by the arrows, bow cut, bathed in blood, limbs splattered with fat, Ravana the enemy of gods, himself being endowed with formidable energy gifted by the Self born creator seized javelin on the battlefield.'

'The Lord of the world of Rakshasas instantly flung javelin, emitting fire without smoke, on Saumithri, which created fear among Vanaras.'

'Lakshmana, the brother of Bharata struck the fierce weapon coming towards him like flames of fire fuelled by ghee, even then it struck him on his broad chest.'

"Lakshmana the eminent hero of Raghu's was badly hurt by the javelin and was burning in pain. King Ravana caught him who was losing consciousness, violently and held him by his shoulders."

'It may be possible to lift Himalayas, Mandara, Meru mountains or even the Devatas of the three worlds but not possible to lift Lakshmana by shoulders.'

'Even though Saumithri was wounded in the chest and the power of Brahma entered (into his chest) he recalled himself as an inconceivable form of Vishnu.'

"Thereafter, Ravana the enemy of Devatas was not capable of lifting Lakshmana's shoulders. Lakshmana could crush the pride of Rakshasas."

'Then the son of the wind god, enraged, came towards Ravana. Full of anger, he struck him with his thunderbolt like fist on the chest of Ravana.'

"By the blow of Hanuman's fist, Ravana the Lord of Rakshasas was shaken and fell on the ground on his knees."

"Much blood flowed from his(Ravana's) mouth, ears, and eyes. Rolling in the hind part of the chariot he became still and sank."

'Ravana of fierce valour having lost senses and waking up from unconscious state, perturbed, did not know where he was. Seeing this the sages, even Vanaras, the demons as well as Devatas shouted in joy.'

'Brilliant Hanuman holding Lakshmana wounded by Ravana in both shoulders brought him to Rama.'

'Lakshmana though unshakeable for enemies, became light for the son of wind god by his friendship and high devotion.'

"That power returned back to Ravana's chariot to its position, leaving Lakshmana, who was difficult to vanquish."

'Lakshmana who could destroy foes, recovering from unconsciousness, relieved of wounds again remembered himself to be part of Vishnu of immeasurable power.'

'Ravana of mighty prowess waking up from consciousness took over his sharp arrows and the great bow also.'

'Raghava also assailed Ravana seeing the fallen Vanara heroes struck in the combat.'

'And then Hanuman submitted to Rama, "Just as Lord Vishnu mounted on mighty Garuda, you should also be mounted on my back and subdue Ravana."'

'On hearing the sub mission of Hanuman, Sri Rama, the Lord of humans climbed on the great monkey and saw Ravana on the chariot.'

'Beholding Ravana, highly energetic Rama wielding his bow went furiously towards him just as Lord Vishnu went with his discuss against Virochana.'

'Rama created a sound like a clap of thunder ringing intensely, a majestic one and spoke in a deep voice to the king.'

'"Oh! Tiger among Rakshasas, forbear, forbear. Having done such an offence to me, where are you going for deliverance"'

'"If you go to Indra or Yama or Sun God or the selfborn Brahma or fire God or Shankara or the ten directions like that, and if you run in front of me you cannot escape."'

'"Oh! king of Rakshasa troop! He, who was struck without support now, even if he were to come now in front, you with your sons and grandsons will be struck to death by him."'

'"By me, who is your adversary, fourteen thousand Rakshasas of fierce forms, who had taken abode at Janasthana and used choicest weapons were exterminated."'

"On hearing Raghava's words, the mighty strong king of Rakshasas seized with violent anger, recalling earlier enmity, struck with blazing arrows like tongues of fire at the time of universal destruction while Hanuman bore Rama."

'Even though Hanuman was hurt by the arrows discharged by the Rakshasa king, being endowed with energy by nature, his energy went on increasing.'

'Seeing the wounds caused by Ravana to Hanuman, the tiger among monkeys, possibly Rama was seized with anger.'

'Advancing towards him, (Ravana), Rama tore into pieces his chariot, wheels, horses, standard and canopy including the charioteer and the darts and swords.'

'Then with a shining thunderbolt like arrows Rama struck with the weapon of Indra into the fine chest in between the shoulders just as Indra would strike the Meru Mountain with his thunderbolt.'

"He, that heroic king, who was not disturbed hurt by thunderbolt of lightning, was agonized when struck by Rama's arrow and let his bow fall."

'Seeing Ravana swooning, great soul Rama took up a crescent shaped arrow and hastily broke his crown into pieces which were shining bright red like the Sun.'

'Rama said to the king of Rakshasas, who was like a serpent rid of poison without (head) crown, without splendour like the Sun without brightness, his glory lost with the crown broken in the combat.'

'A great task of killing mighty heroes has been accomplished by you. Therefore, you are exhausted. I declare that I will not send you to death.'

'"King of night rangers! I know you are agonized after the war. Go to Lanka and rest and reenter, mounted on your chariot with bow. You will witness my strength."'

'Rama having spoken in that way (consoling), the king with his vanity and pride crushed, bow broken into pieces, horses and charioteer killed, wounded by arrows, crown broken entered Lanka hastily.'

'After the king of prowlers, the enemy of Danavas and Devas entered Lanka, Rama and Lakshmana also drew out the arrows from monkeys in the forefront of the battlefield and went.'

'The enemy of Indra having been routed, the suras and asuras, the guardians of the four quarters, including the sea, the large serpents, and sages so also the creatures of land and water were joyful.', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेएकोनषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the fifty ninth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"Then the king of Lanka after entering the city of Lanka, felt humiliated by Rama's arrow, vanity crushed and had lost control over his senses."

'Overcome by humiliation from the high souled Rama, Ravana remained like an elephant rejected by a lion and a serpent rejected by Garuda.'

'The Lord of Rakshasas remained disquieted recalling the arrows of Rama which emitted light like lightning, resembling Brahmadanda.'

'Ravana seated on the wonderful golden magnificent throne gazing at Rakshasas spoke these words.'

'" All the penance which I have done, and the asceticism practised by me equal to Mahendra has become purposeless and defeated."'

'The dreadful words of Brahma spoken to me" know that danger from humans is coming to be true.'

'"I sought protection from Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Rakshasas and serpents but not asked for protection from humans."'

'"I think that Dasaratha\'s son Rama, a human being is about whom king Anaranya born in Ikshvaku race, who cursed me earlier saying, \'In my race will be born a man who will kill you in war, with your sons, your horses, charioteers, all army, O evil minded lowest of Rakshasas, and the vilest of Rakshasas."'

'"In the past, I violated Vedavathi and got cursed by her. The same Woman born as Sita, the daughter of Janaka, is a highly blessed one."'

'"Uma, Nandeeswara, Rambha and daughter of Varuna have cursed me like that and the prediction of those endowed with vision has been attained by me."'

'"Knowing all this, make effort doing what ought to be done and let the Rakshasas strive to succeed positioned on top of the gates."'

'"Let Kumbhakarna of unparalleled profundity, capable of crushing Devas and Danavas, who is in slumber owing to the curse of Brahma be awakened."'

'"Let him be instructed that Prahastha endowed with mighty prowess has been defeated and killed."'

'"Let the Rakshasas climb up the defensive walls and attempt to guard. Also let Kumbhakarna be aroused from sleep."'

'"The Rakshasa, Kumbhakarna, lost consciousness is slumbering at ease and has been sleeping for six to nine months happily."'

'"Deliberating like this with me, Kumbhakarna is sleeping for the ninth day from now. He may be quickly informed (aroused)."'

'"Endowed with broad shoulders, he is the foremost of Rakshasas. He will crush many Vanaras immediately and the two princes (Rama and Lakshmana)."'

'"He, (Kumbhakarna) is the foremost chief among all Rakshasas enumerated. In that way he is distinguished. But he is insensate, remains addicted always to indecent delight in the form of sleep."'

'" After Kumbhakarna is fully aroused, my sorrow impelled in this terrible comb at with Rama will not be there."'

'"What can I do if he does not assist me in such a dreadful comb at because of his weakness, even though he is equal to Indra in strength"'

"On listening to the Rakshasa king's words, the Rakshasas went to the abode of Kumbhakarna highly puzzled."

'The Rakshasas entered the beautiful residence of Kumbhakarna which was one yojana on all sides with huge gates, taking fragrant garlands and foods (to wake up Kumbhakarna) from where they were pushed out by the breath of Kumbhakarna. The Rakshasas endowed with mighty strength pushed their way into the residence of Kumbhakarna and entered.'

'The tigers among Rakshasas entered the residence paved with gold and precious stones, a delightful one and saw sleeping Kumbhakarna of great prowess.'

'Those Rakshasas collected together started to awaken Kumbhakarna, who was like a scattered mountain in dead sleep.'

'The Rakshasas saw Kumbhakarna, destroyer of enemies, the tiger of the southwest, tamer of foes, with his body fully covered with bristling hair, breathing heavily like a serpent with horrible nostrils, turning back with facemouth as vast as underworld all limbs stretched out, emitting smell of fat and blood, arms adorned with gold bracelets, wearing a crown, and sleeping.'

'Thereafter the Rakshasas placed a heap of me at the size of Meru Mountain to please him immensely.'

'The tigers of the south west Rakshasas piled up a mass of marvellous food like the me at of buffaloes, swine, and antelopes.'

'Then the Rakshasas placed thirty three kinds of meat, pails of blood, and a variety of wines in front of Kumbhakarna.'

'Again, they daubed Kumbhakarna with highly fragrant sandal paste to take in fragrance, with wonderful garlands and perfumes.'

'They also burnt incense, sandal to send forth fragrance to gratify Kumbhakarna and thundered like clouds here and there.'

'They blew moon size conches shining brightly. Intolerant Rakshasas raised loud noise simultaneously.'

'Those night rangers drawing the limbs of Kumbhakarna pushed his arms, clapping loudly to awaken him making a sound.'

'On hearing the conchs, and of the clapping of arms, and thundering like a lion, the birds playing in the sky got scattered and fell.'

'Kumbhakarna sleeping like that, could not be awakened. Angry Rakshasas roared and hit him with mallets and maces.'

'Then the excited Rakshasas could not wake up Kumbhakarna happily sleeping on the ground in spite of hitting with rocks and trees and their fists.'

'Unable to bear the force of the breathing out of Kumbhakarna, the Rakshasas could not stand.'

'The Rakshasas of terrible valour resorted to abandoned drums and tom toms that way and pails of clay.'

'Ten thousand Rakshasas surrounded him all at once like a mass of antimony striking him and even made a loud noise. But he never responded.'

'They called him again and again, but he never got up. Then they made a difficult and dreadful effort approaching him.'

'They urged horses, elephants, camels, and donkeys to pounce on him, whipping with staff, whips, and goads.'

'The city of Lanka including the woods was filled with that noise. They pushed him with mallets with all their strength, but he did not wake up.'

'All Lanka and mountains were filled by the great noise made by the Rakshasas. Even then Kumbhakarna did not wake up.'

'Then was collected a thousand drums and beaten with polished gold sticks on all sides continuously.'

'Wrapped in sleep like that because of the spell of the curse, he had not wakened. The Rakshasas got enraged.'

'All the Rakshasas endowed with mighty prowess became enraged and others started to arouse with all their strength.'

'While some were beating the drums, some shouted at the pitch of their voice, some started pulling his hair and some bit his ears.'

'Some poured hundreds of pails of water into ears, distressed that he did not wake up under the spell of deep sleep.'

'Some had their nails fixed with mallets, letting their mallets fall on the forehead, on the chest and throw at of Kumbhakarna.'

'Some struck with sataghni (mace) all over his huge body fastened with cords.'

'A thousand elephants were made to walk over his body. Then Kumbhakarna felt the touch but did not understand.'

'Tormented by hunger and hit by mountain peaks and huge trees he sprang up suddenly descended and awakened.'

'Kumbhakarna, devoid of any beauty threw out his limbs which were like the coils of cobra and as hard as mountain tops, his mouth was unnatural like a submarine fire as he yawned.'

'As he yawned his mouth resembling the underworld, it was like the Sun rose over the top of Mount Meru.'

'As the mighty night ranger awakened and yawned continuously his breath was like wind blowing from the mountain.'

'As Kumbhakarna woke up he appeared like the time spirit at the time of dissolution of the universe like a rainy cloud at twilight as if seeking to consume all beings.'

'His huge eyes were like blazing fire dazzling like lightning glowing like two huge planets.'

'Thereafter having seen several kinds of food items of hogs, buffaloes he ate them.'

'After eating the meat and feeling thirsty, the enemy of Indra drank blood, pails of fat and wine.'

'There upon the night rangers realizing that he got up, came before him, and greeted him with heads bent down.'

'With sleepy eyes casting his glance at the night rangers looked at all of them.'

'He, the bull among the south west region, astonished at his awakening, soothed, and spoke to all the Rakshasas in this way.'

'"What have you done to wake me Hope King is fine and has no fear of danger"'

'"Is there any fear of some enemies Is it because of that you have woken me up Let me know."'

'"I will devour Rakshasa king\'s fear. I will eradicate even Mahendra (mountain) or alleviate fire."'

'"For a small reason he will not awaken me. Tell me the reason truly for waking me."'

'Kumbhakarna, tamer of enemies having spoken in that way in anger, Yupaksha, a minister joined palms and replied to him.'

'"O King! there is no danger from Devas. Only a small destruction done by a human is pressing and causing pain."'

'"O King! This kind of fear from humans has not arisen for us either from Daityas or Danavas."'

'This Lanka is seized by a mountain like army of Vanaras. By the abduction of Sita, there is little fear from Rama.'

'"Earlier this great city was burnt by a single Vanara who killed Prince Aksha, and his elephants and followers."'

'"Rakshasa king, scion of sage Paulastya, an enemy of Devatas, was let off from death by Rama who has the splendour of Sun."'

'"The king could escape from the verge of death and such an act was never done by Daityas or Danavas earlier in the encounter."'

'On hearing the words of Yupaksha, regarding the insult of his brother Kumbhakarna said this rolling his eyes.'

'"I will conquer now the Vanara army along with Lakshmana and Raghava in war and see Ravana."'

'"I will satisfy the Rakshasas with the flesh and blood of Rama and Lakshmana. You will see."'

'Hearing the words of the reply of Kumbhakarna, filled with arrogance and pride, Mahodara, chief of the army, submitted with folded hands and said.'

'"O Mighty Armed One! You hear from Ravana the advantages and disadvantages and thereafter assess the enemy to conquer."'

'Kumbhakarna of extraordinary energy, mighty strong, on hearing Mahodara went in surrounded by Rakshasas.'

'After rousing up Kumbhakarna of frightful eyes and fierce strength from sleep the Rakshasas quickly went to the abode of the ten headed king.'

'All those night rangers, approaching the tenheaded king seated on an excellent se at greeted with folded hands and said.'

'"O Rakshasa Lord! Your brother Kumbhakarna has come here. Greetings to you. Tell us what to do."'

'Ravana on his part said this to the Rakshasas feeling cheerful. "Honour him as propriety demands. I wish to see him."'

'All the Rakshasas taking leave from Ravana said this again approaching Kumbhakarna.'

'All the Rakshasa leaders said to Kumbhakarna," the king desires to see you. Start. Make up your mind. Be pleased to depart to your brother."'

"Formidable and courageous Kumbhakarna also got up from sleep saying 'yes' and rose up."

'Joyful Kumbhakarna, washed his face, had a bath and being thirsty ordered a drink that can increase his strength.'

'By the order of Ravana hurriedly they got several kinds of wine in pots.'

'(Kumbhakarna) Having drunk two thousand pots of wine, slightly excited and inebriated and replenished with strength and energy was ready to depart.'

"Kumbhakarna surrounded by Rakshasas going to his brother's abode happily looked like the Lord of death bent on destroying the creation. He took strides which shook the earth."

'Kumbhakarna went like the thousand rayed Sun illuminating the earth by his splendour brightening the royal path, greeted by a circle of Rakshasas joining palms like Indra who has done a hundred sacrifices went to the abode of selfborn Brahma.'

'And then the Vanaras and the leaders of the Vanara army who were present looked at the immeasurably tall form of Kumbhakarna walking through the royal path and got alarmed.'

'Indeed, some took refuge from Rama who could give shelter, some fell down in panic, some went in all directions in panic, and some out of fear lay down on the ground.'

'Oppressed with fear the Vanaras ran here and there seeing the form of Kumbhakarna that was like the peak of a mountain as if touching the selfluminous Sun, crowned and wonderful, grown in size.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the sixtieth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'On taking up a bow Rama saw Kumbhakarna of extraordinary energy, prodigious, and of large body, adorned with a crown.'

'That foremost of Rakshasas was like a mountain in appearance, it was like Lord Narayana taking steps to the sky earlier.'

'Seeing the Rakshasa who was like a rainy cloud with water, decked with gold ornaments, the commander in chief of Vanaras ran.'

'Seeing the army scared away and the army of Rakshasas growing in size, Rama was astonished and thus spoke to Vibheeshana.'

'"Who is that hero resembling a mountain, a crowned one with tawny eyes, looking like a rainy cloud driven by lightning? He is seen in Lanka."'

'"He is seen here like a lone comet on earth. Seeing him the Vanaras are fleeing hither and thither."'

'"Who is he, that gigantic Rakshasa? Is he a demon or perhaps a colossus? No such being was seen by me earlier."'

'Asked by the prince Rama, of unwearied action, highly intelligent Vibheeshana spoke.'

'"Vyvasvatha (Lord of death) as well as Vasava (Indra) were defeated by him in war. He is Kumbhakarna, the son of sage Visrava, a stupendous one and there is no other Rakshasa who equals him in size."'

'"O Raghava! In war Devas, Danavas, Yakshas, Nagas, ogres, Gandharvas, Vidydharas, Kinneras in thousands were defeated by him."'

'"This Kumbhakarna with pike in hand and fierce eyes, is mighty strong. All the Devatas could not kill him, deluded that he is death personified."'

'"Kumbhakarna is by nature (by birth) energetic and mighty. The strength of other Rakshasas is on account of their boons received by them."'

'" As soon as he was born, he was hungry and this great soul being strong consumed thousands of created beings."'

'"In that way when Kumbhakarna was devouring, out of fear all people sought the refuge of Indra and represented."'

'"Mahendra who was armed with thunderbolt got enraged and hurt Kumbhakarna with thunderbolt. He reeled and roared with the strike."'

'"People were already afraid of Kumbhakarna, and after hearing the lion roar of this Rakshasa they were even more scared."'

'"Then mighty Kumbhakarna, who was enraged, pulled out the tusk of Airavatham and struck at the chest of Indra."'

'"Hit by Kumbhakarna Indra felt tormented. The Devatas, Brahmarshis and Danavas became despondent. Accompanied by created beings they complained to Brahma."'

'"They reported to Brahma about Kumbhakarna\'s ruthless deeds, devouring created beings, insulting, harsh and also destroying the abodes of sages violently and abducting others\' wives."'

'"If he consumes created beings every day like that, in the course of time the world will be devoid of beings."'

'Hearing the words of Indra, Brahma conjured the Rakshasas and saw Kumbhakarna with them.'

'"Beholding Kumbhakarna, Brahma was alarmed and spoke to him to restore the confidence of Kumbhakarna."'

'"Surely you are begotten by Paulastya for the destruction of the universe. Therefore, remain sleeping like a dead one from today, \' said Brahma and cursed him."'

'"Thereafter, by the curse of Lord Brahma, Kumbhakarna fell in front. Highly agitated at this Ravana spoke these words to Brahma."'

'"Oh Brahma! Cutting a golden tree at the stage of fruiting is not fair. It is not proper for you to curse your great grandson in that way."'

'"Your words will not become untrue, no doubt. Sleep, he must but waking time may be fixed."'

'On hearing Ravana\'s words, Brahma said" He will sleep for six months and stay awake for a day."'

'"This hero will open his mouth wide and move about and alone he will consume the world like the swollen fire."'

'"Overtaken by worry, the king out of fear of your prowess just awakened sleeping Kumbhakarna."'

'"This heroic Kumbhakarna has come out of his residence extremely angry and going to and from to consume all Vanaras."'

'"On merely seeing Kumbhakarna, the monkeys are running away. How will they check him who is enraged in war?"'

'"Let all the Vanaras be told, that this one standing high is a machine then the Vanaras will not be scared of victory."'

'Hearing the words of Vibheeshana, which was reasonable and, in their favour, Raghava said this to Nila, the commander in chief of the army.'

'"Pavaka, go and organize all the army and get together to occupy all the gates, highways, bridges in Lanka."'

'"Be ready staying on mountain tops, trees, rocks armed with weapons and rocks in hand."'

'As instructed by Raghava, the monkey leader Nila, elephant among the monkeys, ordered the monkey troops as instructed.'

'Then taking mountains, Gavaksha, Sarabha, Hanuman, Angada who looked like mountains themselves marched to the gate.'

"The monkeys desiring to be triumphant, took trees and began to strike at the enemies on hearing Rama's control."

'Then Vanaras taking trees and mountains in their shining hand s marching close to each other seemed like a huge mass of terrible clouds hanging close to a mountain.', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the sixty first sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'He (Kumbhakaran), who was endowed with indomitable prowess, a tiger among Rakshasas, was sleepy and inebriated, marched along the splendid royal path.'

'Then, Kumbhakarna, who is very difficult to win over, walked violently surrounded by Rakshasas, covered with showers of flowers from houses.'

'He saw the vast abode of the king of Rakshasas, with lattice work of gold and looking bright like the morning Sun'

'He saw entering the abode of Lord of Rakshasas like the Sun penetrating into a mass of clouds, from a distance his elder brother seated on the throne just like Indra saw the SelfBorn Brahma on the throne.'

"While Kumbhakarna accompanied by troops of Rakshasas, was taking strides to his brother's abode, even the earth was shaken."

"Having gone to his brother's residence, stepping into the enclosure, he saw his brother seated in a perturbed state."

'The ten headed Ravana seeing Kumbhakarna, was delighted and got up quickly and made him come close to him.'

"Getting up from his seat, Kumbhakarna endowed with extraordinary might bowed down and clasped his brother's feet and asked him, what task he had to do?"

'Getting up from his seat Ravana embraced and greeted Kumbhakarna. So also, he duly rejoiced and occupied the seat.'

'Mighty Kumbhakarna, duly took the seat. Enraged Ravana with blood shot eyes spoke these words.'

'"O King! For what purpose have I been awakened by you? Whom are you fearing? I wish to know who is to be ceased in life?"'

'Kumbhakarna, was overcome with anger, and asked his brother Ravana, who was seated and rolling his eyes in anger.'

'"Oh! Kumbhakarna of extraordinary prowess! You were asleep for long happily. You do not know that I am afraid of Rama."'

'"Rama, the son of Dasaratha accompanied by Sugriva, crossed the ocean with an army that was cutting our roots."'

'" Alas! You see how the Vanaras, arriving at Lanka, crossing the bridge have done away with groves and gardens."'

'"Of the Rakshasas, the chiefs have been killed in war by Vanaras. But I did not see even one Vanara to have been killed in war. Vanaras have not failed to succeed in war."'

'"Mighty strong I am, but such is the fear that has been created in me from them. You have been awakened, to destroy them. Reported Ravana."'

'" All resources of mine are exhausted. These children and aged are only left in Lanka city, knowing that you will save the city of Lanka."'

'"O broad shouldered brother! Do this task which is difficult for others. O Scourge of enemies! I have not asked you before for such a task."'

'"O Bull among Rakshasas! Being my brother, do this for me. I always have affection for you. Considering that you have encountered war with Devas and Asuras and won both Devas and Asuras, do this help."'

'"O Brother of fierce valour! Get up. I have not seen anyone stronger than you among all beings."'

'"You are a lover of wars. You are a lover of relations. You are always my dear well wisher. O self glorious one! Do this task of throwing out the torrent army just like wind throws rainy clouds."', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the sixty second sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Hearing the lament of the Rakshasa king, Kumbhakarna replied laughing.'

'"While we were discussing earlier and taking decisions, that disaster foreseen by me has reaped for having not trusted the well wishers."'

'"Those who do sinful deeds fall unobstructed so also the fruit of your sinful action has come upon you."'

'"O king! All this action was not thought of at the beginning, nor the consequences of action weighed in the pride of your prowess."'

'"Confident of prosperity, he who defers action earlier, he does not know what is right and wrong later on."'

'" Actions performed without regard for time and place will be disastrous like the oblations offered into fire without consecration, gets wasted."'

'He who thinks with ministers and considers the five aspects of threefold duties and moves in the right path performs (Five aspects of action are the method of initiating action, material to be worked upon, time and place of action, provision against mischance and the chances of success). Threefold duties with reference to enemies are Sama, Daana, and Bedha."'

'"The king who does his duty in time in accordance with justice and thinking intelligently with his ministers, understands rightly."'

'"O Rakshasa king! A man should pursue his duty or worldly gain or sensual pleasures all the three combined or at least any two in time (the scriptures lay down that duty should be pursued in the morning, wealth in the afternoon and sensual pleasures at night)."'

'" A sovereign king or a king hearing these three does not recognize the best of the three is in vain even though he heard many."'

'"You are the foremost of the Rakshasas! After discussing with ministers, a king either by gifting or conciliation or dissension or resorting to all of them at the appropriate time takes resort to pursue virtue, wealth, or sensual pleasures at the right time, never meets with sorrow."'

'"That king who knows the reality of things and makes decisions in consultation with his ministers, who make their living with their intelligence will live happily."'

'"People whose intelligence level is no better than animals, who have been included to express their views, who do not know the meaning of shastras express their views out of impudence."'

'"Those who have no knowledge of shastras are ignorant of the science of wealth and desire huge wealth. Their advice ought not to be followed."'

'"Those who tender advice, which is unwholesome but in wholesome grab, out of their impudence should be kept away from discussion examining early as they mar the purpose."'

'"Some ministers in order to ruin the king, collide with enemies and make the king take wrong actions."'

'" A ruler should know those ministers bribed by the enemy, who have become close to the enemy and appear as friends. Those ministers must be known through their behaviour in the deliberations."'

'"Enemies find out the weakness of the king who is unsteady and rush after the actions forcibly without thinking like brahmins just as birds find the holes in Krauncha mountain and elaborate to others."'

'"He who knowing fully the actions of the enemy does not protect himself he attains reverses and is also dragged down from position."'

'"The advice given to you in the past by your brother alone is good. That is good for you. Or you may do what you wish."'

'Kumbhakarna having spoken that way, the ten headed Ravana frowned, shaking his eyebrows in anger and spoke this way.'

'"Why do you, who are worthy of respect, instruct me like a father or teacher? These words express your cleverness in speaking. It is time to do what is appropriate now. Follow what is to be done."'

'"Due to delusion, or lack of understanding or due to pride of my strength I did something. To talk of it now again is futile."'

'"You may speak of only what is proper to do now. Do not think of the past as it is gone."'

'"If at all there is any affection in you for me now, you recognize your strengths and think what action is justified in your heart. You may nullify the evil that sprung from my heart."'

'" A friend is one who helps when one\'s fortune is lost and is desperate. Deviating from morals the one who is prepared to help is a relation."'

'Thereafter knowing that Ravana is agitated and arguing in a grave and harsh manner, Kumbhakarna, spoke slowly in a gentle tone.'

'Sensing that Ravana is disturbed very much, Kumbhakarna taking hold of the brother and consoling him slowly said these words.'

'"Listen to my words, Rakshasa king! You are a scourge of enemies. Put aside this sorrow. Give up the agony also. Be normal. You ought to be your normal self again."'

'"While I am (my body is) with life you need not entertain despondency. I will exterminate him, by whose account you are agitated."'

'"O king! I will give you good advice in all circumstances being a relation. Salutary advice has been given to you out of brotherly affection."'

'" At this time, you will see a relation doing that which is right out of affection. All enemies will be destroyed."'

'"O mighty armed King! You see Rama along with his brother being killed by me and Vanaras fleeing away from the forefront of war."'

'"Be happy today, O Mighty armed brother! I will bring Rama\'s head from the battlefield. Sita will be sad. You will see."'

'" All the Rakshasas in Lanka whose relations have been killed will witness Rama\'s death which will be very welcome."'

'Now I will wipe the tears of Rakshasas who lost their kin and are bewailing their loss.'

'"Now you will see Sugriva the foremost of monkeys in mountain shape, resembling mountains bathed in blood like evening Sun illumined like the cloud."'

'"O Sinless Ravana! As I am going to kill this son of Dasaratha whom Rakshasas are intending to kill, how can Rama kill you now?"'

'"Rakshasa king! Raghava will kill you only after killing me. Never give way for distress."'

'"Command me to wage war at this moment, O Scorcher of enemies. There is no one better than me to be sought for O hero endowed with extraordinary strength."'

'"I shall exterminate your enemies, however mighty they may be. I can contend with Indra or fire god or Yama or wind god, Kubera or even Varuna."'

'"Even Indra with a body as big as a mountain, with pointed teeth like a spike, with sharp teeth will fear me and run if I roar.'

'"Or else giving up weapons and swords using my arms indeed I can crush, and no one can stand in front of me."'

'"I shall not fight with javelin or mace or sword or sharp arrows. Enraged, alone I can strike down even Indra."'

'"Now if that Raghava can withstand the force of my fists, you will see volleys of Rama\'s arrows will drink my blood."'

'"O King! while I am here for what reason do you worry and have anxiety? I will go now and decidedly destroy your enemy."'

'"O King! Give up the fear, as both Rama and Lakshmana will be made short of work in the battlefield, as also mighty Sugriva and dispose of Hanuman, the destroyer of many Rakshasas and who set fire to Lanka."'

'"I will remain steady in the battlefield and devour monkeys also. I wish to confer an unusual and great glory on you."'

'"Even if there is fear of Indra and Brahma that haunts you, I shall destroy them away like the sun dispels darkness. Devas will fall flat on earth when I am enraged."'

'"I shall quell Lord Yama also, devour fire god, make the Sun including stars fall on earth."'

'"I shall kill Indra who has done a hundred sacrifices, drink up the ocean the abode of Varuna, crush the mountains totally, and break the earth."'

'" All beings all over will be eaten now. For a long time Kumbhakarna was sleeping. Now you will see that the food of all the three worlds, earth, heaven and intermediate region will not be enough to fill my stomach."'

'"Through the destruction of Rama, I will bring happiness to you who are worthy of happiness. I will collect Rama along with Lakshmana and all the Vanara leaders and devour all."'

'Hearing the words of mighty Kumbhakarna, of massive body and round arms Mahodara said.'

'"Kumbhakarna! Although you are born of noble race, you are insolent, seeing your low intellect in all aspects you have no knowledge of what should be done or not to be done."'

'"Ravana, a bull among Rakshasas is conversant with rules of time and place and knows his own enemies, his progress and decline also."'

'" A strong person of unsophisticated intellect, who is progressive, a knower of everything will do such a task which is not possible to do?"'

'"The virtues, worldly gain and sensuous pleasures give results separately as you said. They are incompatible with what you said and that it is its nature you said. what is the proof?"'

'" Actions alone are the means of happiness. Being so how can sinful actions accrue good results?"'

'" All virtues and worldly pleasures and even otherwise give only benefit. But if done with disinterest and unrighteousness it can give a result which is other than prosperity."'

'" All beings reap the fruit of their actions in this world as well as in other worlds. He, who remains to be pleasure seeking, devoted to actions will receive blessings and attain pleasures in this life only (not here after)."'

'" At that time the king intended in his heart (to abduct Sita), and we approved his action, and it was done. What is wrong in doing such a courageous action against an enemy?"'

'"You have set out alone (for war) and the reason adduced by you is ill conceived and improper. I shall tell you."'

'"How is it possible for you single handed to win Raghava of exceeding might, who killed many Rakshasas in the past at Janasthana?"'

'"Look! Those highly energetic Rakshasas, who were won by Rama at Janasthana are scared of him even now."'

'"Do you desire to awaken Rama, who is like an enraged lion knowingly, who is like a sleeping snake?"'

'"Who can dare to approach Rama, who is difficult to encounter, unbearable and burning in anger like the spirit of death."'

'"Face to face with the enemy this total army will be in danger. You\'re going alone is certainly not desirable."'

'"How can a weak person desire to go to the enemy who is rich in resources, determined to sacrifice his life several times and submit himself?"'

'"O Best of Rakshasas! How would you enter into combat with one who is great among all human beings and while even Indra and Sun God are not equal to him in war?"'

'Mahodara having spoken to agitated Kumbhakarna in the midst of Rakshasas in this way, submitted to Ravana, who makes people cry.'

'"Having got Vaidehi, why are you talking like that? Sita will submit to you if you desire."'

'"O King of Rakshasas! A means of bringing her round is known to me. Listen, think over with your intellect."'

'"You pronounce that I, Dwijihva, Samhradri, Kumbhakarna and Vitardana, five of us will go forth to kill Rama."'

'"Thereafter, proceeding forth we shall try to win your enemy. If we win, there will be no purpose for you to do any action."'

'"If our enemy survives in combat, we too will survive and review as we planned and see."'

'"Bathed in blood, wounded by the arrows marked with Rama\'s name, bodies torn cruelly we will come here from war."'

'"We too will hold your feet saying \'Rama and Lakshmana have been devoured by us\'. Then you will grant our desires."'

'"Thereafter mounted on elephant backs all over the city will make a rakshasa pronounce that Rama accompanied by his brother are killed."'

'"O tamer of enemies! In the name of expression of happiness, thereafter gift items of enjoyment to the attendants, and companions and granting wealth as per their desire.'

'"Thereafter give your warriors, garlands, cosmetics and many drinks and drink yourself happily."'

'Thereafter, when the scandal that Rama and Lakshmana with all his friends have been devoured is widely spread everywhere, approaching Sita privately, restoring confidence and consoling her, tempt her with offering wealth, grain and gems and conciliate.'

'"O King! By conjuring her like this, helpless Sita overtaken by fear and sorrow having lost her husband will submit to you in spite of no desire to you."'

'"Her charming husband ceased to live and thinking of no alternate, being a fickle woman, will accept your dependence."'

'"That Sita having grown up in much comfort, deserved felicity. Tormented with grief, desperate, depending on you alone for happiness, will submit to you completely."'

'"To me this is the best course. As soon as you see Rama, do not be eager for war. It is meaningless. Great gain will accrue to you from here."'

'"O Lord of the people! If a king conquers his enemy without any loss of army, without facing any dangerand without war, such a mighty ruler of the earth will indeed earn fame and merit and attain prosperity."', '।।इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेचतुष्षष्टितमस्सर्गः।।', 'This is the end of the sixty fourth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Kumbhakarna having heard Mahodara, warned him not to speak that way and spoke to Ravana, the foremost of Rakshasas.'

'"You know me. I will get rid of your enmity killing the cruel minded Rama. Be fearless and happy now."'

'"Warriors will not roar wastefully like waterless clouds. You will see me roaring after having completed the action."'

'"Warriors do not tolerate even when glorified. They never praise themselves. They accomplish difficult deeds without displaying them."'

'"O Mahodara! Your words of appeal will be accepted as cowardly, devoid of intellect and to those who do not know anything, it looks as if you know."'

'"You, who always fear in combat, are talking pleasingly to the king , going after him happily brought the matter to this state."'

'"The king is left alone in Lanka, which is divested of its wealth, and treasury reduced, and the army destroyed by unfriendly people pretending as good friends around him."'

'"I am setting out in this manner to the battlefield, to overpower the enemies in the battle in order to redeem the mistakes done by all of you."'

'Wise Kumbhakarna having spoken in that way, the Rakshasa king, Ravana laughed and replied in this way.'

'"O dear! You are an expert in war! This Mahodara is terrified at Rama. He is not desiring war. There is no doubt."'

'"O Kumbhakarna! There is none who is equal to you in might and friendliness at heart towards me. You go and be victorious by killing the enemies."'

'"You are difficult to encounter. You have awakened for the sake of putting an end to the enemy. It is a momentous period for the Rakshasas, O tamer of enemies."'

'"Therefore, taking up trident holding the noose in hand like the God of Death proceed to devour the monkeys as well as the two princes shining like the Sun."'

'"Seeing your form, the Vanaras will run away, Rama and Lakshmana\'s heart will break."'

'The highly energetic king of Rakshasas having spoken like that to mighty Kumbhakarna, felt as if he had taken birth again.'

'The king who knew the valour and mighty strength of Kumbhakarna remained happy like the moon.'

"The king having spoken these words, mighty Kumbhakarna, pleased with the king's words set forth to fight."

'The destroyer of enemies, hurriedly seized a whetted flaming iron dart, embellished with polished gold.'

"The dart was like Indra's thunderbolt in form and was equal to thunderbolt, capable of destroying Devas, Danavas, Gandharvas, Yakshas and Pannagas, was like rising fire shining like the face of an enemy. It was sharp, wreathed in garlands of red colour and emitting flame. Kumbhakarna wielding the dart said."

'Enraged and angry Kumbhakarna said, "I will proceed now. Let my army remain here. I will consume them on keys today."'

'Hearing Kumbhakarna\'s words Ravana said," Go with trident, sword and iron bar in hand surrounded by the army."'

'"The Vanaras are gigantic, endowed with speed and determination. They will destroy with their teeth when you are not alert and alone."'

'"Therefore, go surrounded by the army. They are extremely difficult to encounter. They are like thunderbolts. Destroy them who are on the enemy side and not favourable to Rakshasas."'

'And then the brilliant Ravana got up from his seat, garlanded Kumbhakarna with garland s of flowers encrusted with gems.'

"Then Ravana placed armlets, rings, exquisite ornaments, garland s of pearls like moonlight on Kumbhakarna's neck."

'Ravana then placed his crown, wonderful fragrant garlands and rich suspended earrings on Kumbhakarna.'

'Adorned with armlets studded with gems and golden ornaments on his distinguished large ears, Kumbhakarna shone like fire.'

'Adorned with a huge dark girdle, Kumbhakarna seemed like a bright jewel like Mount Mandara used for churning nectar of immortality fastened by Vasuki.'

'Kumbhakarna decked in heavy golden shield (impenetrable by any weapon) and difficult to break, seemed like the lightning with self effulgence, glowing like fire, shone like the evening twilight around the mountain peak.'

'Decked with ornaments on all his limbs, with pike in hand, the Rakshasa was like Narayana ready to take three strides to cover the universe. Endowed with great strength, embraced his brother, went round in reverence bowing down his head and sallied forth.'

'Kumbhakarna, of huge body, of loud voice and highly capable having been dismissed by Ravana, went with the great army after benediction and started observing.'

'Many great warriors seated on the best of chariots, with best of weapons amidst noise of conchs and drums, elephants, horses also and thunder like chariot warriors, started to proceed.'

'On dreadful and mighty serpents, camels, donkeys, horses, lions, antelopes, and birds also the Rakshasas accompanied Kumbhakarna.'

'Kumbhakarna, the enemy of Devas and Danavas determined and eager showered with a rain of flowers, head covered with parasol, excited with drink, wielding sharpened tridents in hand and smeared with blood red fragrant sandal paste, sallied forth in that state.'

'Rakshasas of loud voice, great prowess, and fearful with frightening eyes, lifted the many weapons in hand and followed on foot.'

'Rakshasas with blood red eyes, of huge body size, dark blue in colour, holding tridents, sharpened whetted axes and weapons of many kinds, iron bars and maces, clubs, mallets and palmyra trees, the evil minded vast army set out.'

'Assuming another fearful form, Kumbhakarna who was highly energetic, endowed with mighty strength and frightful in form, which was a hundred bows in breadth and six hundred bows in height, with eyes like wheels of chariot, enraged, seemed like a huge mountain.'

'Thus spoke, Kumbhakarna who resembled a charred mountain, with wide mouth, reaching near the Rakshasas, laughing.'

'Thereafter, furious Kumbhakarna said "Now I will consume all the battalions of Vanaras just as moths are consumed by fire."'

'"These forest rangers have never desired to do any harm to me. This clan serve as ornaments of our gardens."'

'"The root cause of besieging Lanka is Rama and Lakshmana. I will kill them in combat."'

'When Kumbhakarna had spoken that way the Rakshasas made noise that was like the sound of an agitated ocean.'

'As wise Kumbhakarna was proceeding swiftly , dreadful portents appeared.'

'The clouds appeared in the colour of donkey and there was thunder and lightning. The oceans, forests and earth seemed as though shaken.'

'She jackals were seen with flaming morsels throwing from their mouths. Birds wheeled in a circular way and settled.'

'On the way as he was going an eagle alighted on his pike. His eyes twitched and left shoulder throbbed.'

'Then a burning meteor fell from the sky making a terrible sound. The sun lost his glow and the wind lost its delight।।'

'Kumbhakarna went unmindful of the portents which made hair stand on end propelled by the force of destiny.'

'He who resembled a mountain in form, leapt the boundary wall on foot like a cloud and witnessed the amazing Vanara troops.'

'On seeing the mountain like form of the foremost of the Rakshasas. the vanaras dispersed in all directions like clouds swept by the wind.'

'Heavy cloud like Kumbhakarna, a notorious one, perceiving the Vanara troops scattered like clouds in all directions emitted roar, laughing aloud.'

'Hearing the dreadful roar of Kumbhakarna, that resembled the rumbling of clouds, many Vanaras fell on the ground like severed Sala trees.'

'Armed with a huge iron bar, Kumbhakarna stood for destroying the enemies like the great time spirit, deadly God of Death waits at the end of the universe along with Kinkaras, like a king.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेपञ्चाषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the sixty fifth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Mighty Kumbhakarna, a gigantic one, resembling a mountain peak, having swiftly crossed over the boundary of the city roared.'

'Kumbhakarna roared making loud noises as if proclaiming victory, like the breaking of mountains and reverberating of ocean.'

'Observing that rakshasa with frightening eyes, who could not be killed by Indra or Yama or even by Varuna coming towards them the vanaras ran in fear.'

'Seeing the Vanaras running in fear, Angada spoke to Nala, Nila, Gavaksha, Mahabala and Kumuda.'

'"Forgetting yourself, that you are warriors, not knowing by nature, being Vanaras where are you going?"'

'"O good Vanaras! You are modest. Return. Why are you protecting your life? This Rakshasa is not capable of facing war. He can create only fear."'

'"O Vanaras! We will dispel this huge rakshasa, a nightmare with our power. Come back."'

'Overcoming fear, the Vanaras getting together from here and there holding trees by hand, proceeded to the battlefield.'

'Those forest rangers who were extremely enraged turned back to hit, determined like the elephants in rut went to vanquish Kumbhakarna.'

'Though Kumbhakarna was hit with lofty mountain peaks and trees with blossoms at crests, he was not shaken.'

'Fallen on his limbs many rocks got broken, even the treetops with blossoms were broken and fell on the ground.'

'Enraged Kumbhakarna began to destroy Vanaras endowed with extraordinary vigour, just as great forest fire burns the forest.'

'Many bulls among the Vanaras lay on the ground like trees with red flowers on top tossed and fallen on the ground.'

'The Vanaras leapt without looking back. Indeed, some dropped into the ocean, and some flew into space.'

'Struck by Rakshasa, the Vanaras ran in the same path crossing the ocean (by which they came).'

'Out of fear the vanaras rushed to plains with pale countenance, some climbed up mountains and bears climbed up trees.'

'Some drowned in the ocean, some entered into the caves, some others not knowing what to do sat down and others fell on the ground and some slept as if dead.'

"Seeing the monkeys routed, Angada spoke, 'Stay, return back. We will fight'"

'"I do not see any refuge for you even if you go round the globe. All of you return back. Why do you preserve life?"'

'"Monkeys! Your valour can\'t be challenged. If you run away for life abandoning weapons even your wives will ridicule you. That is more than death."'

'"You are born in noble families, and are widely spread. As such why are you running away like ordinary monkeys as if terrified giving up your valour. It is not worthy of you."'

'"Earlier in the assembly of people you made vigorous statements and acclaimed yourselves highly with selfpraise. Where has it gone?"'

'"He who is defeated lives, but people will say he is timid. Resorting to the path of good people and serving them gives up fear."'

'"If we are killed in war, fallen dead on the ground and our life span is reduced, we will attain the realm of Brahma which is difficult to attain."'

'"By killing the enemy, we will attain fame. Or else we will attain the world of Brahma, liberated."'

'"Just as flies reaching the blazing fire can\'t escape, so also Kumbhakarna can\'t escape with life after facing Kakuthsa."'

'"Even though we are distinguished, if we preserve our life by running away for life, destroyed by one, our glory will come to an end."'

'While the heroic Angada, adorned with gold armlets, was speaking in that manner to the fleeing vanara heroes, condemned by the hero the vanaras replied as follows.'

'"Kumbhakarna, the Rakshasa has done havoc to us. This is not the moment to stay. Our life is dear to us."'

'All the Vanara troops having replied that way, seeing Kumbhakarna of frightful eyes coming towards them, scattered in all directions.'

'Though the heroic monkeys were running away, Angada by his good words and examples turned them to return from wherever they were.'

'All the Vanara troops having heard Angada, son of Vali happily restored awaiting his command.'

'Rshaba, Sarabha, Mainda and Nila, Kumuda, Susena, Rambha, and Tara headed by Dwiviida, Panasa and Hanuman marched ahead swiftly to the battlefield.', '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेषष्टितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the sixty sixth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic, the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

"Having heard Angada's words, the Vanaras of gigantic body firmly decided to wage war and returned back."

'The Vanara leaders, having been reminded of their valour in battle by Angada gladly returned with a resolve to stake their life and carried on the battle.'

'Thereafter the Vanaras of huge body wielding huge trees and mountain peaks quickly rushed towards Kumbhakarna.'

'Valiant Kumbhakarna, a gigantic one, highly enraged lifted mace and crescent shaped arrow struck the enemies on all sides.'

'Kumbhakarna held seven or eight or even hundred, thousand vanaras and threw them on the ground like serpents thrown by Garuda.'

'Kumbhakarna became extremely angry, and caught hold of sixteen, eight, ten vanaras in the same way ninetynine and thirty and many more Vanaras and devoured them and went about like Garuda after having eaten the serpents.'

'The Vanaras collected from here and there, having restored confidence in themselves with great difficulty, held trees and mountains and stood in the forefront of the battle.'

'Thereafter Dwivida, a bull among the Vanaras lifted a mountain and went towards Kumbhakarna who resembled a threatening cloud.'

'Vanara (Dwivida) going near Kumbhakarna struck him with the mountain. He missed the target and it fell on his army.'

'The huge mountain peak crushed the horses, elephants and chariots and Rakshasa charioteers also.'

'The battlefield on which the Rakshasas and horses were crushed, charioteers were killed by the speed of the mountain remained wet with blood.'

'The Rakshasa charioteers severed the roaring Vanara leaders forcibly with their arrows emitting frightening sounds. They were like the Lord of Death at universal dissolution.'

'Great monkeys, uprooting huge trees, began to destroy chariots, horses, camels, and Rakshasas.'

'Stationed in the sky Hanuman rained mountain peaks, rocks, and huge trees of several kinds on the head of Kumbhakarna.'

'Mighty Kumbhakarna split off the rocks, mountain peaks and the trees breaking them.'

'Thereafter Kumbhakarna holding a sharp pike rushed towards Hanuman who uprooted a mountain peak and obstructed him placing it before him.'

'Enraged Hanuman struck Kumbhakarna endowed with a rock like frightening body. Overpowered by that blow Kumbhakarna was upset and bespattered with fat and got bathed in blood.'

"Kumbhakarna ,who was like a mountain blazing like fire, pierced at Maruti's chest with his pike shining like lightning just as Guha struck at Krauncha mountain."

'The great son of windgod, pierced with pike in the chest, ejected blood from his mouth, and roared in a frightening manner which was like thunder rumbling at the time of dissolution of the universe.'

"Rakshasa's army collected together rejoiced to see Hanuman agonized. Vanaras were frightened and fled in fear of Kumbhakarna."

'The mighty and wise Neela flung a peak of a mountain on Kumbhakarna and restored the confidence of the army.'

'(Kumbhakarna) observing the mountain peak coming towards him pierced it with his fist. Struck by the fist, the peak broke and sparks of fire came out shining brightly and fell on the ground.'

'Rshaba, Sarabha, Neela, Gavaksha and Gandhamadana, these five tigers among Vanaras attacked Kumbhakarna.'

'Those Vanaras of exceptional strength attacked gigantic Kumbhakarna on all sides by rocks, trees and by their fists, hands and feet also.'

'Their attacks were like soft touches to Kumbhakarna, and no pain was experienced by him, and he encircled Rshaba by the shoulders with great impetuosity.'

"Rshaba, the bull among Vanaras, of frightful appearance pressed by Kumbhakarna's shoulders, started bleeding from his teeth and fell down."

'Angry Kumbhakarna (enemy of Indra) hit Sarabha with his fist, Neela with his knees hurt Gavaksha and slapped him with his palms. Gandhamadana was kicked with force.'

'Hurt by the blows of Kumbhakarna, their eyes bathed in blood, the Vanaras fainted and fell on the ground like cut down Kimsuka trees.'

'Being great leaders and the important among them fallen, the Vanaras went in thousands towards Kumbhakarna.'

'The bulls among Vanaras themselves looking like mountains endowed with great strength climbed up Kumbhakarna and bit him.'

'The bulls among Vanaras hurt Kumbhakarna, endowed with strong shoulders, by scratching with nails, biting with teeth and hitting him with arms and fists.'

'The tiger among Rakshasas covered with thousands of Rakshasas was resembling a mountain with trees grown on itself.'

'Holding the Vanaras, the mighty Kumbhakarna started devouring all Vanaras just as Garuda does with serpents.'

'As Kumbhakarna thrust Vanaras into his mouth, the Vanaras came out through his nostrils and also through his ears.'

'The foremost of the Rakshasas, who resembled a mountain became enraged and mutilated the Vanaras.'

'That terrible Rakshasa swooning and wetting the ground with flesh and blood ranged through the army of Vanaras like fire at the time of dissolution of the universe.'

'Holding pike in hand, mighty Kumbhakarna was shining in the battlefield like Indra holding thunderbolt, and like Lord of Death holding the noose.'

'Just as fire god consumes dried forest in summer, Kumbhakarna was consuming the Vanara army.'

'Then with the army killed, the Vanaras moved without any leader making unnatural sounds out of fear and anger.'

'Destroyed by Kumbhakarna in many ways, the Vanaras were heartbroken and sought the refuge of Raghava.'

'The son of Vali who sprung from Indra, the wielder of the thunderbolt seeing the Vanaras routed, rushed towards Kumbhakarna to assault.'

'Angada taking a huge peak of a mountain roaring again and again following Kumbhakarna frightening the Rakshasas flung the mountain top on the forehead of Kumbhakarna and crushed him.'

"Hit on the forehead by Angada, Kumbhakarna, burning with fury rushed. The intolerant Rakshasa then rushed to Vali's son with force."

'Mighty Kumbhakarna agitated, making loud noise and frightening all the Vanaras hurled his pike on Angada.'

'Angada who was knowledgeable of warfare, endowed with prowess, a bull among Vanaras, stopped the pike approaching him with agility and escaped.'

'Jumping up that way, Angada slapped him with his palm on the chest in anger. By that the mountain like Kumbhakarna became unconscious.'

'The mighty Rakshasa regained his consciousness and, doubling his fist hit Angada with the back of his hand and Angada fell, lost senses.'

'When the tiger among the monkeys fell unconscious on ground, Kumbhakarna rushed towards Sugriva taking out the pike.'

'Valiant Sugriva, seeing the mighty Kumbhakarna coming towards him jumped (in excitement).'

'Sugriva, of great prowess lifting a mountain peak, whirled it round and round and darted towards Kumbhakarna swiftly.'

'Kumbhakarna, looking at the monkey Lord advancing towards him, stood in front of all limbs braced.'

'Sugriva spoke these words seeing Kumbhakarna who stood smeared with the blood of Vanaras and eating monkeys.'

'"Give up with Vanaras, who are monkeys by nature. Bear this one mountain\'s blow of mine."'

"Hearing the king of Vanara's words of courage and strength, the tiger among Rakshasas, Kumbhakarna spoke these words."

'"O Vanara! You are the grandson of creator Brahma and son of Rksharaja, endowed with fortitude and so roaring like this."'

"On hearing Kumbhakarna's words, Sugriva forcibly discharged a mountain resembling a thunderbolt on the chest of Kumbhakarna."

'Then the mountain peak dropped on the chest broke into pieces. Thereafter the monkeys were despaired, and Rakshasas roared in joy.'

'Struck with mountain peaks, the Rakshasa became furious, and his pride was hurt. He opened his mouth widely making loud noises, his pike glowing like lightning, turned the pike into circles and hurled at Sugriva to put an end to him.'

'Hanuman the son of windgod instantly seized Kumbhakarna with his arms, whose shaft was covered by chains and broke with both hands quickly.'

'Then a rejoiced monkey, resting the thousand bharas iron pike on his knee broke it.'

'Seeing the pike broken by Hanuman, the army of Vanaras rejoiced and roared repeatedly all over and rushed.'

'Rakshasa was dismayed and mellowed. The forest rangers rejoiced and roared like lions going round. Seeing the broken pike Vanaras applauded Hanuman.'

'That great soul, the Lord of Rakshasas seeing the pike broken in that way, was highly enraged. Taking Malaya Mountain from Lanka, he struck Sugriva who was approaching him.'

'Struck by the piece of mountain the Vanara king became unconscious and dropped on the battlefield. Seeing that the Rakshasas were happy and naturally roared with a feeling of triumph.'

'Kumbhakarna approaching the Vanara Lord Sugriva endowed with wonderful and dreadful prowess, went like wind carrying clouds taking him.'

'In the battlefield, the form of Kumbhakarna which resembled a huge cloud was distinguished in appearance like the lofty peak of mountain Meru.'

"Thereafter the heroic Rakshasa king having held Sugriva in the battle went, duly praised (by Rakshasas), hearing the roaring sounds of gods in heaven wondering at Sugriva's capture."

"Then Kumbhakarna, an enemy of Indra, who was equal to Indra in heroism seizing Sugriva, the Indra of monkeys, who is equal to Indra, thought, 'If Sugriva is killed it is like killing all the army including Rama.'"

'Seeing the army running away here and there and Sugriva being captured by Kumbhakarna, wise Hanuman, the son of Maruti started thinking.'

"'Sugriva has been caught. What is my duty now? I will do what is just. I will destroy that Rakshasa who is in the form of a mountain', thought Maruti."

"'Mighty Kumbhakarna shattered by my fist in a duel, and the king of Vanaras delivered, all the monkeys will be rejoiced.'"

"'Or else this Sugriva alone can get liberated by fighting by himself with gods, demons and Nagas also, even if he is captured'."

'"I think that Sugriva, hit by Kumbhakarna with a mountain, has lost senses and is not able to know."'

'Sugriva will soon regain consciousness and do what is good for Vanaras.'

'"If Sugriva is released by me, he will not be happy forever. His fame will be lost."'

'"Therefore, I will see the exhibition of his prowess for a while. Thereafter I shall reinforce the scattered army of Vanaras."'

'Hanuman, the son of Maruti thinking in this way said to the Vanara army and brought determination.'

'Then Kumbhakarna taking the great Vanara who started to shake by then, entered Lanka through the roads of lofty mansions from where Rakshasas hailed showering flowers.'

'Exceptionally strong Sugriva with parched grain and fragrant water showered on him in the royal path, being cool, regained consciousness.'

'(Sugriva) being strong and painfully gained senses, from the arms of the great Rakshasa, started looking at the royal path of the city. He was bewildered and started pondering this way.'

"'Caught in this way, how can I do (take action)? I will do what is possible, pleasing, and good to Vanaras now.'"

'There after the king of Vanaras decided to act and tore off the ears of the enemy ruler of gods (Kumbhakarna) with his sharp nails, bit off the nose with his teeth, and sides of Kumbhakarna.'

'Deprived of ears and nose by Sugriva, splitting with nails and teeth, Kumbhakarna was highly furious and pinning down Sugriva pounded him against the ground, limbs bespattered.'

'Dropped on the ground by Kumbhakarna of dreadful strength, pressed against the ground surface, Sugriva bounced to the sky to get reunited with Rama.'

'Great hero Kumbhakarna, devoid of ears and nose drenched in blood shone like a mountain in springs.'

'Kumbhakarna of terrific valour and gigantic body, drenched in blood, dark in colour like a mountain of collyrium, resembling evening cloud, the night ranger went towards the battlefield.'

'Himself (Sugriva) gone, the enemy of the Lord of gods rushed again retreating, "I am ferocious, without weapon." Then seizing an iron mallet, Sugriva went reflecting.'

'The great Kumbhakarna then departing instantly entered into Vanara army consumed them as fire at dissolution consumed people.'

'Kumbhakarna started seizing principal monkeys in the same way as death at the end of universe. Being famished for flesh and blood he entered the Vanara army in delusion and consumed not only Vanaras but Rakshasas, demons and bears also.'

'Taking one, two, three, and many Vanaras along with Rakshasas hastily with one hand he was gulping them.'

'Then the mighty Kumbhakarna while being struck by peaks of mountains, he was feasting on Vanaras fat and blood oozing out from his mouth.'

'Being devoured by Kumbhakarna, the Vanaras went for refuge to Rama. Enraged Kumbhakarna followed the Vanaras behind.'

'Stretching his arms on all sides picking hundred, seven hundred, eight hundred and two hundred and three hundred, he ran devouring the vanaras.'

'His limbs smeared with fat and blood, with wreaths of entrails hanging on his ears, with sharp teeth, grown in his body to huge size, rained darts like the spirit of death at the end of the world.'

"At that time, Sumitra's son, Lakshmana, winner of enemy forces, conqueror of forts, enraged went to fight."

"Valiant Lakshmana pierced seven arrows on Kumbhakarna's body and discharged many arrows on him."

'Kumbhakarna having been tormented, put an end to the dart (of Lakshmana). Mighty Lakshmana there upon flew into a rage.'

"Then he covered Kumbhakarna's glittering golden shield with arrows just as the evening wind covered the cloud."

'Adorned with golden ornaments (Kumbhakarna), covered with darts without being tormented he looked like a dark mountain shining like sun rays covered by clouds.'

'Thereupon the Rakshasa sounding like the rumblings of clouds disdainfully spoke these words to Lakshmana, the son of Sumitra.'

'"You have exhibited your valour without fear in battle, challenging me who has conquered even Lord of Death without difficulty in battle."'

'"He who is ready to face me, a rival of Lord of Death in conflict, with weapons in hand in great battle is worthy of honour to me."'

'"Indra mounted on the elephant, Airavata surrounded by all Devatas, indeed never stood before me in conflict."'

'"Now I am gratified with your valour, though young. Taking leave of you, I wish to go to Raghava."'

'"I am gratified by your valour, strength and enthusiasm which has been exhibited by you in the battle. However, I wish to kill Rama alone."'

'"When Rama has been put to an end by me in conflict, whoever remains can be struck down by my army."'

'When that Rakshasa made such boastful and dreadful statements in the battlefield, laughing heartily, Saumitri replied as follows.'

'"O Hero! that heroism you have acquired is irresistible even by Indra is true. Now your prowess has been witnessed. Rama stands here, immovable like a mountain."'

'Kumbhakarna of mighty strength, the night ranger hearing Lakshmana, rather disregarding his words, overlooking him went alone towards Rama as if shaking the earth.'

'Sri Rama, son of Dasaratha, now released a sharp arrow presided over by Rudra and fixed into the chest of Kumbhakarna.'

"As Rama hit in anger, at once fire mixed with flames shot forth from Kumbhakarna's mouth."

"Pierced by Rama's missiles, the foremost of the Rakshasas, Kumbhakarna was very angry and rushed towards him dispersing all the vanaras in the battle."

"Adorned by peacock's plumes, those arrows slipped into his breast, he lost senses, his mace naturally dropped down from his hand."

'All his weapons scattered on the ground, the mighty Kumbhakarna deprived of weapons thought for himself and created havoc with his feet and fists.'

'Pierced by arrows excessively all over his limbs, bathing in blood flowing from the injury was like a mountain with a spring.'

'Kumbhakarna in violent anger, blood flowing from the injury, went about devouring Vanaras, Rakshasas and bears.'

'Thereupon, Kumbhakarna endowed with terrific valour like God of Death hurled towards Rama a mountain peak whirling it round which split.'

'Rama once again taking the bow, split the peak of the mountain with seven unfailing arrows on its way even before it reached the target.'

'The righteous Rama, a bull among men, taking his arrows adorned with gold split the peak of the mountain.'

'While falling down, Kumbhakarna was like Mount Meru, shining by his splendour was falling down and knocking down two hundred monkeys.'

'At that time, righteous Lakshmana who was attentively deliberating on many plans to kill Kumbhakarna, said to Rama.'

'"This king intoxicated with the smell of blood is not knowing his own people and foes and devouring both Vanaras and Rakshasas."'

'Let the bulls among Vanaras climb upon him and the foremost of Vanaras and the troops stand all over.'

'Distressed by heavy weight unable to get up evil minded Rakshasa fallen on the ground will not destroy monkeys.'

'Having heard the words of the wise Prince, the monkeys collected climbed on Kumbhakarna happily.'

'Enraged Kumbhakarna shook off the monkeys climbed on his body like a harsh elephant shakes off its rider.'

'Seeing the Vanaras shaken, Rama went towards the Rakshasa instantly and took out his best bow.'

"Raghava's eyes turned red with anger, went quickly in anger as monkeys and troop leaders oppressed by Kumbhakarna were rejoiced."

'Rama, taking a formidable bow which resembled a great serpent, with a quiver full of excellent arrows shining in gold that looked beautiful, went forward restoring the confidence of the monkeys.'

'Mighty Rama, who is extremely difficult to win over, went with full conviction followed by Lakshmana and surrounded by vanara troops.'

'Great Rama, endowed with extraordinary might, saw Kumbhakarna, the tamer of enemies covered with blood and having red eyes.'

'Surrounded by Rakshasas, he was searching for Vanaras, like an elephant, guarding a quarter, searches.'

'(Kumbhakarna) Adorned with gold armlets, blood flowing from his mouth was like a rain cloud showering from Vindhya or Mandara mountain.'

'With blood red eyes, licking the corner of his mouth with his tongue, crushing Vanara army, he looked like God of Death at dissolution.'

'Seeing the foremost of Rakshasas, shining like fire, Rama, the bull among men stretched his bow.'

'Enraged by the loud sound of the twang of the bow, the bull among Rakshasas unable to bear rushed towards Raghava.'

"Thereafter Rama spoke to Kumbhakarna, whose hands were like Vasuki's body, coming towards him to attack on the battlefield like a cloud chased by wind."

'"O king of Rakshasas! Come. Do not be despondent. I stand with my bow. In a moment I will destroy you. Look, the Rakshasa clan will be put to an end."'

'Knowing that this is Rama, Kumbhakarna laughed in an unnatural manner making a sound and ran after scattering the monkeys in great rage.'

'Highly energetic Kumbhakarna laughing in hideous ways making sounds like rumblings of clouds breaking the hearts of forest rangers spoke these words.'

'"I am not Viradha, not Vijeya, not Kabhanda, not also Vali or Maricha. I am Kumbhakarna and have come."'

'Seeing Kumbhakarna slain by the glorious Raghava, the Rakshasas informed Ravana, the king of Rakshasas.'

'"O King! Kumbhakarna, who was equal to the God of Death, devoured and won over the Vanaras, scattered the army, has joined death as a consequence of time (fate)."'

'"Your brother Kumbhakarna showed his might for a short time. But by virtue of Rama\'s energy and arrows, his mountainlike body was reduced to a trunk of dreadful appearance. Bleeding excessively, he was like a mass submerged in an ocean of blood. like a tree caught in forest fire he was blocking the gate of Lanka in ugly form with a head, nose and ears chopped off."'

'Hearing that Kumbhakarna of great strength was slain, Ravana immersed in grief became deluded and fell.'

"Hearing about uncle's destruction, the sons of Ravana, Devanthaka, Naranthaka, Trisira and Atikaya, roared aloud afflicted by grief."

"Ravana's brothers, Mahodara and Mahaparsva were overtaken by sorrow on hearing about the unwearied action of Rama and slaying of Kumbhakarna."

"Thereafter the foremost of the Rakshasas regained consciousness with great difficulty and awakened to the situation of Kumbhakarna's destruction, wailed disturbed in mind."

'"Ha! Hero! Kumbhakarna! You, who crushed the pride of the enemy, endowed with great prowess have deserted me and gone to the abode of death, actually by divine will."'

'"O Kumbhakarna of extraordinary might! You have tormented the enemy army singlehanded with valour. You are going alone leaving me and the kinsfolk."'

'"I who depended on you like my right arm did not fear Devatas or Danavas and I am destroyed now."'

'"You, who crushed the pride of Devas and Danavas are equal to timespirit and death at dissolution and being a hero, how did you die in the hands of Raghava?"'

'"You are never affected by the strike of thunderbolt. How are you sleeping on the ground hit by Rama\'s arrows?"'

'"These Devatas and all sages are standing in the sky, seeing the battle and laughing aloud seeing your destruction."'

'"Having found an opportunity, all the Vanaras, highly rejoiced, on this very day, will surely climb over the gates of forts of Lanka determined."'

'"I have no purpose with the kingdom. What will I do with Sita? I have lost my life and mind with Kumbhakarna\'s death."'

'"If I do not kill Raghava who killed my brother in battle it is a waste of my life." Thus, thought Ravana.'

'"This very day, this very minute I shall reach the region where my brother died, I have no interest in life."'

'"Devatas who were harmed by me earlier will laugh at me now that Kumbhakarna is slain. How will I win Indra?"'

'"This calamity that has come upon me was because I have not taken such auspicious advice rendered by the great soul Vibheeshana."'

'"Thus, loss of both Kumbhakarna and Prahastha is dreadful. It is because of not following the words of advice of Vibheeshana totally. It hurts me."'

'"Righteous and prosperous Vibheeshana has been expelled by me earlier. By that action, I have obtained this grief."'

'Hearing the lamentations of the evilminded Ravana, Trisira spoke to him.'

'"There is no doubt that Kumbhakarna, who is your middle father and uncle, was also endowed with great prowess. He has been killed. O King! Good men like you do not wail."'

'"O King! You are a conqueror of the three worlds. Why do you wail like a common man?"'

'"You are bestowed by Brahma with a javelin, a shield and an arrow and a chariot yoked by a thousand donkeys making rumbling sounds like a cloud."'

'"Devas and Danavas have been won over by you, deprived of weapons also. Now endowed with all weapons you will be able to win Raghava."'

'"O King! Stay on. I will move forth to the battlefield and uproot your enemy like Garuda uprooted serpents."'

'"Just as Lord of Devas by Sambara, and Vishnu by Naraka, in the same way Rama will also be destroyed struck by me."'

"Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, hearing Trisira's words thought that impelled by destiny that he was reborn."

"Hearing Trisira's words both Devanthaka and Naranthaka and glorious Atikaya became enthusiastic for combat."

'Then Ravana\'s sons, the heroes, and bulls among ogres, equal to Indra in valour, roared saying, "I will start", "I will lead."'

'All (sons of Ravana) are capable of coursing through the sky, experts in conjuring tricks, capable of crushing the pride of Devatas and all, are fierce in fighting.'

'All sons of Ravana possessed stupendous strength, all were very famous, and never got defeated in war be it Gandharvas, Kinnaras or even gods will get vanquished by them.'

'All were experts in the use of weapons, all were heroes and skilled in warfare, knowledgeable in scriptures, so also all were blessed with boons.'

'Surrounded by his sons, who matched Sun in brilliance and capable of crushing the pride of foes, great in destroying immortals, Ravana shone like Lord gods.'

'Ravana embraced his sons, decked them with ornaments and jewels and enriched them and offered benediction and sent to encounter.'

'Ravana sent his two brothers Yuddhonmatta and Matta for the protection of his sons for defence in combat.'

'Those heroes greeting gigantic Ravana, went around him clockwise (as per tradition) and departed.'

'The six leaders endowed with great strength, anointing themselves with fragrance, which can ward off injury went to fight.'

'Trisira, also Atikaya, Devanthaka, Naranthaka, Mahodara and Mahaparsva impelled by destiny went.'

"Thereafter Mahodara mounted on an elephant born of Airavata (Indra 's elephant) family, by name Sudarsana went."

'Ready with all kinds of weapons, quivers as well mounted on elephants shone like the setting Sun in the west.'

"Ravana's brother, Trisira went mounted on a chariot yoked to the best of horses with all kinds of weapons."

'Wielding a bow and sitting like a leader in the chariot Trisira shone as if attended by lightning, meteors, light, and rainbows.'

'Trisira seated in the best of chariots, with his three heads adorned with crowns shone like the golden mountain, Himalayas with its three peaks.'

'Then Atikaya the very bright son of Rakshasa king, foremost of all archers mounted on the best of chariots.'

'The chariot (of Atikaya) had excellent wheels, well fitted with strong axles, stout poles, equipped with quivers and bows, with best of spears, bars, and swords.'

'His wonderful coronet encrusted with gold was shining, sparkling, and looked splendid like the Meru Mountain.'

'The tiger among ogres (Atikaya) surrounded by the great army of ogres, the prince was shining in the chariot like Indra, the king of gods and wielder of thunderbolt.'

'Naranthaka, mounted on Uchaisrava, the white horse, decked in gold, was swift as thought in speed.'

'Naranthaka seizing a barbed missile like a burning spear, looked like son of Lord Siva wielding javelin in hand.'

'Devanthaka, holding a bar encrusted with diamonds in both hands, seemed like Vishnu in disguise with a mountain (to churn the milky ocean).'

'Mahaparsva holding an ace in hand in the war shone like Kubera.'

'Those great souls followed by elephants, horses, Rakshasas with superb weapons sounding like the rumbling of rainy clouds went like gods of Amaravati.'

'The great princes were wearing crowns resplendent like the Sun and glowing like planets in the sky.'

'The princes, grasping the white weapons shone like flocks of white cranes in the dark autumnal clouds in the sky.'

'Those heroes determined to defeat the enemy even if it meant death and went thinking for the combat.'

'The great Rakshasas who were fierce in combat went roaring shouting loudly and discharging arrows.'

'By the sound of their clapping of arms and their lion roar it was as though the sky was breaking and the earth was shaking.'

'Departing from there the Rakshasa army saw Vanara army ready with many rocks.'

'The huge monkeys also saw groups of elephants, horses and chariots and heard hundreds of bells of the chariots and Rakshasas all over like groups of dark clouds with huge weapons glowing like fire and Sun surrounded by Rakshasa army.'

'Seeing the Rakshasa army approaching, the monkeys found an opportunity to attack them and collected huge mountains, deadly strong trees in great joy unable to tolerate roared in return.'

'There upon the Vanara leaders, endowed with extraordinary prowess, beholding the joy of Rakshasa troops, unable to bear roared dreadfully.'

'Those monkey leaders entering dreadful Rakshasa army uplifted rocks and mountains with trees and shone.'

'Some monkeys springing into the sky, while some staying on earth, with trees, rocks as weapons, enraged, ranged the Rakshasa army.'

'Vanara leaders seizing huge branches of trees fought a frightening war with Rakshasas.'

'The Vanaras of dreadful valour and unparalleled might waged with trees, rock and mountain when obstructed by the Rakshasas।।'

'The Rakshasas and Vanaras enthusiastic in the battlefield roared like lion. The Vanaras pounded the Rakshasas with rocks.'

'In the combat, the enraged Vanaras killed Rakshasas decked with shields and ornaments. Some killed the ones mounted on chariots, elephants, and horses.'

'The Rakshasa leaders, hit by the blows of Vanaras, fell down on the mountain peaks, trembling with their eyes protruded by the blows of fists.'

'The Rakshasas also pierced with arrows the foremost of the monkeys and struck with tridents swords and lances.'

'Their limbs stained with the blood of foes, both Vanaras and Rakshasas eager to conquer one another started striking one another.'

'Then in a short while the battlefield was covered with blood and rocks and swords used by the monkeys and Rakshasas.'

'There, the battlefield was filled with mountain like forms of Rakshasas drunk with the pride of warfare, lying scattered all over.'

'Vanaras, were lifting and dropping the scattered Rakshasas, breaking the tridents and a wonderful war went on using their limbs.'

'The bull among Rakshasas struck at Vanaras with other Vanaras and the monkeys struck Rakshasas with other Rakshasas.'

'The monkeys struck at the Rakshasas taking the weapons left over and tearing the weapons of the Rakshasas and the Vanaras also struck the Rakshasas.'

'In the battlefield both Vanaras and Rakshasas struck at one another with their head, rocks and swords and emitted lion roar.'

'The Rakshasas killed by Vanaras, their shields and weapons broken, blood flowed from their limbs just as sap exudes from broken trees.'

'In the battlefield a chariot with another chariot, an elephant with another elephant, a horse with another horse struck one another.'

'Rakshasas shattered the Vanara leaders with horseshoe shaped, halfmoon shaped, spear shaped sharp arrows, as well as trees and rocks.'

'The battlefield, covered with broken trees and mountains, fallen vanaras and rakshasas, seemed difficult to tread on ground.'

'Those Vanaras leaving behind fear, reaching the war field, rejoicing with pride, not at all depressed, carried out war with Rakshasas.'

'As the conflict progressed and tumultuous fighting was on, Vanaras were feeling exultant and seeing Rakshasas struck down the ascetics and Devatas made loud noises in joy.'

'Then Naranthaka, mounted on horseback went at wind speed taking hold of javelin and entered Vanara army just as fish entered the ocean.'

'Great hero (Naranthaka) single handed persistently destroyed seven hundred Vanaras with his glowing spear. In that way the enemy of Indra shattered Vanara army and monkey leaders.'

'Vidhyadhara, the great sage, witnessed Naranthaka moving seated on the horseback firmly.'

'On the way he saw flesh and blood fallen like a heap of a mountain covered fully with Vanaras.'

'Naranthaka went past the Vanara leaders all over even before they attempted, he destroyed them.'

'Uplifting his lance in the battle, Naranthaka consumed the Vanara troops as fire would burn up forests even before the Vanaras uprooted trees and rocks. many Vanaras fell like mountains hit by a thunderbolt.'

'Mighty Naranthaka, the destroyer of humans, ranged over all sides in all directions in the battlefield, like the wind in the rainy season, taking a burning spear and crushing everything.'

'The gallant monkeys got terrified and could not flee, nor stand, nor move. The audacious Naranthaka marching ahead pierced the Vanaras either marching or jumping or stationary.'

'With lance that looked like death and the spear glowing like the Sun, Naranthaka routed the Vanaras, who fell down.'

'Unable to bear the very severe impact of the strike of the spear which was like the strike of thunderbolt the Vanaras cried making loud noise.'

'The forms of the monkey heroes fallen down unconscious shone like mountain peaks struck by the thunderbolt and fallen.'

'The Vanaras who were struck by Kumbhakarna and fallen unconscious, came and stood before Sugriva.'

'Sugriva looked around all over the monkey troops running here and there out of fear of Naranthaka.'

'(Sugriva) saw the Vanaras troops running and Naranthaka seated on horseback advancing with a spear.'

'Sugriva, the Lord of Vanaras seeing (Naranthaka advancing) spoke to his son Angada who resembled Indra in valour.'

'"Oh! March ahead and immediately release the life of the Rakshasa seated on horseback terrifying the Vanara army."'

"On hearing the king's words, Angada went just as the sun rays comes out of a cluster of clouds."

'Angada, the best of the Vanaras, adorned with arm lets resembled masses of rocks and shone like a mountain with metal streaks.'

'Brilliant Angada, unarmed only with nails and teeth (to fight) advanced towards Naranthaka and spoke these words.'

'"Stop! What can you do with these common monkeys? Throw your spear at me, which equals thunderbolt."'

"Hearing Angada's words Naranthaka flew into a rage. Biting his lips with teeth, hissing like a serpent Naranthaka stood before Angada. He hurled his spear glowing like fire on Angada's chest violently. It struck Angada and shattered, went round, and fell."

"Then Vali's son beholding the broken and shattered spear fallen like the coils of serpent, raised his palm and struck at the head of Naranthaka's horse."

'His horse, which closely resembled a mountain, fell on the ground, its head broken, cheeks drawn in, eyeballs broken, tongue got ejected by the stroke of the palm of Angada.'

"Observing the horse fallen, Naranthaka, endowed with great power, overcome by anger raised his fist and struck at the head of Vali's son."

"Angada's head smashed by the blow of the fist of Naranthaka, hot blood flowed rapidly for a while. Recovering from delusion, gaining consciousness he wondered at the strength of Naranthaka."

'Angada clenching his fist, whose vehemence was equal to vehemence of death coming down from the top of the mountain peak, brought down Naranthaka.'

"Naranthaka's chest having been split by a blow on his chest, vomiting flaming blood from his throat was as if shattered by the stroke of lightning fell down like a mountain."

'Naranthaka, the foremost of the heroes, having been killed in combat, the Devatas and gods of the three worlds experienced great joy.'

'Seeing the bulls among Rakshasas Naranthaka, Devanthaka, Trisira and Mahodara a scion of Paulastya and Mahodara, killed the Rakshasas cried aloud.'

'Mahodara who closely resembled a cloud, mounted on the best of elephants chased brave and courageous son of Vali.'

'Then, powerful Devanthaka who was immersed in grief of his brother, taking hold of a glowing iron bar rushed forward towards Angada.'

'Then Trisira, seated on the chariot, effulgent as the Sun, yoked to the best horse marched towards Angada.'

'Angada observed that all the three chiefs of Rakshasas, who were capable of crushing the pride of gods marching towards him and uprooted a huge tree.'

'Just as Indra took a flaming thunderbolt, Angada, the hero took hold of huge branches of trees and hurled at Devanthaka with force.'

"Trisira split the trees with the arrows which were like venomous serpents. Observing Angada's action he flew up."

'Then the leader of the monkeys, rained trees and rocks. Angry Trisira attacked all of them with sharp arrows.'

'Mahodara shattered those trees with the iron clubs. Trisira attacked brave Angada with arrows.'

'Mahodara chased the elephant on to Angada in anger and attacked him on his chest with his iron clubs.'

'Then infuriated Devanthaka quickly came over Angada directly and attacked him with his iron club and retreated.'

'Eminent and highly energetic son of Vali did not feel perturbed when three of the foremost Rakshasas attacked him together.'

'Angada, who was endowed with high speed, and exceedingly difficult to encounter, jumped up the huge elephant of Mahodara attacked him.'

"By that blow of Angada, that king of elephant's eyes dropped, and it cried."

'Mighty son of Vali removed the tusk of the elephant and hit Devanthaka with it by jumping over him in the battlefield.'

'That astonishing Rakshasa shaken like a tree, thrown by the wind, shed huge amounts of blood which was of the colour of lacquer.'

'Thereafter the terribly strong Devanthaka taking iron spike quickly pierced Angada.'

'Then, hurt by the club the son of Vanara king fell down on his knees once again and got up.'

'While Angada was getting up, Trisira again hit him on the forehead with three straight going arrows.'

'Then finding Angada surrounded by the three Rakshasa leaders, Hanuman as well as Neela set out.'

"Thereafter Neela hit Trisira with the peak of the mountain and Ravana's son broke the mountain into pieces with arrows."

'Hit by hundreds of arrows, the mountain peak broke into pieces of stones like sparks and flames fell from it.'

"Mighty Devanthaka, observing (Trisira's action), was happy on the battlefield, and went with his club to assault Hanuman."

'Then the son of wind god, Hanuman observing Devanthaka coming towards him, got up and hit him on the forehead with his thunderbolt like fist.'

"When the heroic and strong son of the wind god hit on the head of Devanthaka, the Rakshasas trembled by the sound of the great monkey 's blow."

"Devanthaka's skull was shattered by the blow, and his teeth, eyes and tongue were forced out, the son of Rakshasa king fell dead on the ground."

"Devanthaka, the foremost of Rakshasa warriors, an enemy of gods, endowed with great strength, having been killed in the conflict, Trisira became angry and rained arrows on Neela's chest."

'Mahodara got enraged, mounted on an elephant just as the Sun went over Mandara mountain and went for war. Then Mahodara wielding bow rained arrows, just as rainy clouds with lightning and rainbows showers rain, on the mountain like chest of Neela.'

"Neela's body wetted by arrows all over, the limbs pierced with arrows, the monkey leader remained powerless and could not move in spite of being extraordinarily strong."

'Thereafter Neela also regained his senses and uprooting a mountain filled with trees went over Mahodara at high speed and attacked him on the forehead.'

"Then smashed by the impact of the mountain, along with his elephant Mahodara's body fell to the ground. Released from life, he fell like a mountain struck with lightning."

'Trisira got enraged seeing his uncle killed, seized his bow and with a sharp arrow pierced Hanuman.'

'The son of the wind god in anger hurled a top of the mountain on mighty Trisira, who split the mountain into several pieces with an arrow.'

"Then seeing that the top of the mountain hurled was ineffective in that battle over Ravana's son, Hanuman discharged rain of trees."

'Stupendous Trisira tore with his whetted arrows the rain of trees through the sky and roared.'

'Then Hanuman also jumped up in anger and tore the horse off Trisira just as the lion would tear the lordly elephant with nails.'

'In the same manner, Trisira, the son of Ravana sprung up and seized a javelin, just as God of death in dark night and hurled at the son of wind god and shattered.'

'Hanuman, the best of monkeys, snapped the javelin flung by Trisira on him, which came down unobstructed like a meteor from heaven and the monkeys roared.'

'Seeing the dreadful form of shattered javelin, all Vanaras rejoiced and thundered like rain clouds.'

'Trisira, the foremost of Rakshasas then lifted his sword, placed it on the chest of Hanuman and dug into it.'

'Heroic Hanuman hit by Trisira, attacked him with his palm on the chest.'

'Trisira, a highly energetic one, hit by Hanuman with his palm, dropped the weapon from his hand, lost his senses and fell on the ground.'

'Taking the sword from Trisira, as he was falling, the great Vanara who resembled a mountain roared, creating terror in all, surrounded there.'

'Unable to bear that roar, that Rakshasa got up jumping and struck Hanuman with his fist.'

"The great monkey hit by the fist (of Trisira) became furious and in anger he got hold of Trisira's head with crown."

"Enraged wind god's son, cut off the three heads of Trisira adorned with earrings just as Indra cut off the heads of Vishwarupa, son of Twashta."

"The heads of Trisira, an enemy of Indra, resembling mountains with incongruous eyes glowing like Vyshvanara's eyes, fell into wilderness like stars fallen from the path of Sun."

'Trisira, the enemy of gods, endowed with the prowess of Indra got killed by Hanuman. The earth shook, the monkeys roared and the Rakshasas from all sides took to their heels.'

'Witnessing Trisira killed, earlier Mahodara also, Devanthaka and Naranthaka who are difficult to encounter killed, monkeys roared in joy seeing that Matta became very angry.'

"Mahaparsva seized hold of a good venerable, allpowerful mace plated with gold, smeared with flesh and blood, shining with lustre, shining red with enemy's blood, an effulgent one whose head has been glowing decorated with red flower garlands that brought terror to Airavatam, Mahapadma, and Sarvabhuama, the three elephants guarding the three of the four quarters."

'Matta, the Rakshasa leader became very furious and took hold of the mace glowing like fire, at the time of dissolution of the universe and scattered the monkeys.'

'Rshaba, the bull among Vanaras endowed with prowess, springing up came and stood in front of Mahaparsva.'

'Again, seeing Rshaba standing in front like a mountain, enraged Mahaparsva hit him on the chest with the mace that was like a thunderbolt.'

'Hit in that way by the mace, Rshaba, bull of Vanaras, with chest broken, blood flowed excessively.'

'Regaining consciousness after a long time the monkey chief, Rshaba, was angry, his lips quivering as he was, ran to Mahaparsva.'

'The chief of the Vanaras, whose form was like a mountain, endowed with speed, got up quickly, duly, and forcibly hit the Rakshasa (Mahaparsva) in the space between his arms.'

'Like a tree whose roots have been severed, the Rakshasa fell on the ground. Then seizing forcibly, the dreadful mace that resembled the rod of Lord of death he roared.'

'For a short while, Mahaparsva, the enemy of gods remained as if life had gone off up and struck the son of waters (Rshaba).'

'The monkey was unconscious for a while having fallen on the ground. Regaining senses, overcoming, took up the mace which looked like the rock of a foremost mountain and struck him (Mahaparsva) on the battlefield.'

'He (Rshaba) reached the body of the ferocious enemy of gods and brahmins. He split his chest with his mace and the timid Rakshasa shed blood just as Himalaya Mountain discharges water.'

'The great Rakshasa Mahaparsva went towards the mace held by Rshaba, the great soul. Taking hold of the mace, Rshaba struck the Rakshasa again and again and pierced him in the forefront of the battlefield.'

'Shattered by his own mace, Matta (Mahaparsva), whose eyes had been crushed, had fallen like a mountain struck by lightning.'

'Strength gone, life ceased, eyes crushed, his own Rakshasas fallen on the ground, the Rakshasa army fled.'

'Highly energetic Atikaya, who was like a mountain in form, had huge body, obtained boons from Brahma, subdued the pride of Devas and Danavas, was equal to Indra in valour. Seeing his own army of Rakshasas that caused horripilation, uncles who were bulls among Rakshasas struck down in the battlefield and his own brothers Yuddhotama (Mahodara) and Matta (Mahaparsva) struck down, he flew in rage.'

'Highly energetic Atikaya, who was like a mountain in form, had huge body, obtained boons from Brahma, subdued the pride of Devas and Danavas, was equal to Indra in valour. Seeing his own army of Rakshasas that caused horripilation, uncles who were bulls among Rakshasas struck down in the battlefield and his own brothers Yuddhotama (Mahodara) and Matta (Mahaparsva) struck down, he flew in rage.'

'Adorned with a crown, Ravana glowing like a thousand suns collected together mounted the chariot and darted towards Vanaras.'

'Adorned with crown, and polished earrings, twanging his bow, proclaimed his name and roared sounding aloud.'

'By that lionroar, and proclamation of his name (by the sound of the twang) frightening the Vanaras he struck terror.'

'Those Vanaras seeing the huge body thought, "This is Kumbhakarna, who has got up and come\'. Out of fear, they sought the help of one another.'

'The Vanara troops, observing his form resembling the Trivikram form assumed by Vishnu, the monkey troops fled here and there in panic.'

'The Vanaras were deluded on reaching the huge body and went to Sri Rama to seek refuge.'

'Then Kakutstha saw from a distance form of huge body looking like a mountain, wielding bow, rumbling like a cloud at universal destruction.'

'Raghava the great, seeing the form of a huge body, was amazed, reassured by the Vanaras, and spoke to Vibheeshana.'

'"Who is he, the yelloweyed, resembling a mountain, seated in the broad chariot drawn by a thousand horses?"'

'"Who is he in the midst, with sharp tridents and shining spears, like Maheswara surrounded by beings?"'

'"Who is he, gleaming like the tongues of time spirit (Kala spirit), with flashes of javelins, encircled with lightning and looking like a cloud shining very bright?"'

'"His bows decorated with gold on the back, are like a rainbow in the sky on all sides and makes the chariot excellent."'

'"The tiger among the Rakshasas seated in the chariot is the foremost car warrior. He is illuminating the battlefield like the brightness of the Sun, resplendent like Sun \'s rays. By his arrows he is illuminating the ten directions. The Rahu emblem on top of the pole of the chariot is very splendid."'

'"His bow with three curves, covered with gold, decorated, is close to a thundering cloud, casting its splendour."'

'"His chariot with standard, flag and axletree is a great one driven by four charioteers emitting sound like the rumblings of clouds."'

'"This chariot has twenty quivers, ten frightening bows, and eight bow strings of golden colour lay arranged in the chariot."'

'"It has two swords off our cubits and ten cubits long swords provided with hilts hanging on its sides as decoration."'

'"Wearing red garland s round the neck, brave, like a mountain in form, dark with large mouth, like death, like sun veiled by clouds he seems."'

'"By adorning armlets, his both arms are like high peaks of Himalaya mountain shining away."'

'"He who shines like the full moon between two Punarvasu stars, his auspicious eyes and countenance shines with both earrings."'

'"Oh! Vibheeshana, a mighty armed one! Show me that foremost of Rakshasas, whom all Vanaras feared and fled in all directions."'

'Interrogated by the highly brilliant prince Raghava, energetic Vibheeshana revealed.'

'"The tenheaded and highly brilliant king Ravana, who is the brother of Vysravana, is of terrible deeds and highly exploitative."'

'"To him was born a blessed son, valiant one, compeer of Ravana, who served elders, learned and well versed in sastras."'

'"He is best in riding on horseback, on elephant back and in the use of sword and bow. He is capable of sowing dissension, making peace, giving charity and statecraft."'

'"He is known as Atikaya, son of Dhanyamalini. Lanka remains fearless on his shoulders, you may know."'

'"By penance on supreme self he propitiated Brahma, who blessed him with mystic missiles by way of boons by which his enemies were subdued."'

'"Exemption from death from gods and demons was given to him and all this wonderful shield and chariot as bright as the sun."'

'"By this (boon) hundreds of Devatas and demons were defeated by him, Yakshas were killed, nay Rakshasas were protected."'

'"Here is strong Atikaya, a wise son of Ravana, bull among Rakshasas, who is a subduer of the pride of Devas and Danavas, by whom thunderbolt of Indra was obstructed firmly in battle and likewise the noose of Varuna was repelled in war."'

'"Oh, best of men! Quickly make efforts to put an end to him before he puts down Vanara army."'

'Thereafter, mighty Atikaya entered the monkey army, twanged his bow again and again and made a loud noise.'

'Observing the dreadful enemy seated on the chariot, the foremost of the great Vanaras rushed towards him.'

'Kumuda, Dwivida, Mainda, Neela, even Sarabha, all at once assailed him with trees and mountain peaks.'

'Atikaya, endowed with extraordinary energy, efficient in the use of weapons, shattered the trees and rocks hurled by the Vanaras with his arrows adorned with gold.'

'The powerful night ranger of terrible form, pierced all monkeys who were facing him in the battlefield with iron arrows.'

"The monkeys were hard pressed by Atikaya's hail of arrows. Their limbs broke and were unable to resist."

'Just as a young lion with youthful pride would strike a group of deer, the enraged Rakshasa struck the army of monkey heroes.'

'The Rakshasa lord, wielding a weapon in the midst of the monkey army, indeed did not strike any, but armed with bow and quiver went with pride towards Rama and spoke.'

'"I am with a bow and arrow seated in the chariot. Indeed, I am not strong in fighting with common warriors. Whoever is interested to fight now can come speedily to fight with me."'

'On hearing Atikaya, Saumithri the destroyer of enemies, became angry, not enduring and not able to tolerate went towards him taking a sword.'

'Furious Saumithri, springing up, took up his arrow from the quiver, stretching to full length before he discharged the arrow.'

'The twang of Lakshmana filled the mountains, earth, ocean, and all directions striking terrible fear in the night ranger.'

"Then the extraordinarily energetic and powerful son of Rakshasa king was in turn frightened at the sound of Saumithri's bow and was astonished."

'Seeing Atikaya, furious Lakshmana sprang up and took a sharp shaft and spoke as follows.'

'"O Saumithri! You are valiant but young, not able to discriminate. I am equal to the Lord of death. Why do you desire to comb at with me?"'

"The shafts discharged from my arm can't be borne, by the Himalayas, even the atmosphere between the sky and earth can't bear the force."

'"Why do you want to arouse the fire of dissolution sleeping comfortably? Return, casting away your bow, without confronting. Go away."'

'"Or else if you want to oppose and not return, give up your life and proceed to Yama\'s abode."'

'"See my sharp shafts capable of reducing enemy\'s pride like Ishwara\'s trident, ornamented with polished gold."'

'"These arrows are like serpents and can drink your blood just as an angry lion drinks the blood of elephants. Therefore, I tell you", said Atikaya to Lakshmana."'

'Prince Atikaya, having spoken as said before, fitted his bow in wrath. Hearing the proud statement of Atikaya, the highminded Lakshmana, endowed with strength, enraged, and spoke these words of great meaning.'

'"You are evil minded. By mere statement you people can\'t become good chiefs. I stand armed with a bow and arrow. Prove your strength."'

'"Reveal yourself by action not by indication. You do not deserve it. He who is with prowess is a right hero."'

'"You are seated in the chariot with all kinds of weapons collected. By that alone you do not become capable. Show your capacity."'

'"Then I will strike down his head with sharp arrows and throw him just as ripened palm fruit drops in the process of time."'

'"Now, you will drink the blood ejected from your neck by the holes made with my pointed arrows decked with polished gold."'

'"You should not underestimate me thinking I am young or old to win. You do not know that I am spirit of death in battle. Did not Vishnu as young Trivikrama win the three worlds going by three strides?"'

'On hearing the words of Lakshmana, which was reasonable and full of truth, Atikaya became furious and took up the best of arrows.'

'Then vidhyadharas, demons, devatas, daityas, sages and great guhyakas arrived at the battlefield to witness.'

'Then enraged Atikaya, fixing his arrow to the bow as if discharging it in the sky directed at Lakshmana.'

'Lakshmana, the heroic destroyer of enemies, shattered the venomous serpent like arrow with his sharp half moon shaped arrow.'

'Seeing the arrow torn asunder like a serpent, Atikaya was offended and became very angry and fitted five arrows to his bow.'

"The night ranger set loose those arrows at Lakshmana, Bharata's brother. Lakshmana shattered them even before it reached him."

'Lakshmana, the heroic destroyer of foes, having split those arrows, seized a shaft which was a bright and sharp flaming arrow.'

'Valiant Lakshmana, foremost of the wielders of bow stretching his bow till the ear, quickly discharged the arrow.'

'The heroic Lakshmana fully stretching the arrow bending to curvature struck Atikaya, the foremost of Rakshasas on his forehead.'

'That arrow stuck on the forehead of the terrific Rakshasa looked like a serpent on a mountain.'

"Now tormented by Lakshmana's arrow the Rakshasa was shaken dreadfully like the gate of Tripura (the city built of gold, silver, and iron in heaven, in space and earth by Maya and burnt by Rudra)."

'Recovering from the hurt and reflecting, the Rakshasa contemplated the course of action, and said \'By releasing the arrow on me you are an enemy worthy of praise."'

'Having spoken that way bending his face setting both shoulders right, he settled at the rear end of the chariot started to move from the chariot.'

'The bull among the Rakshasas taking, one, three, five and seven arrows, fixing them to the bow stretching released.'

"The gold feathered arrows released from the rakshasas's bow, were like death arrows which shone in the sky as if the sky was glowing."

"Raghava's brother remained unconfounded and then he shattered the volley of many sharp arrows released by the Rakshasa."

"Ravana's son, an enemy of Indra, observing that all arrows have been ineffective, took up another sharp arrow."

'Highly energetic Atikaya, fixing another arrow released it between the breasts of Saumithri and pierced.'

"In the battle, Saumithri was hurt in the chest by Atikaya's arrow and blood flowed like the ichor from elephant in rut."

'He (Lakshmana) being glorious and noble himself seized hold of the pointed arrow stuck in his body and removed it with a mystic spell.'

'Then Lakshmana by concentration of his mind fixed on fire god which presided over the arrow, that great selffixed in his bow glowed.'

'Highly energetic Atikaya took a serpentlike arrow with gold feathers and charged it by the concentration of his mind on the power of Sun god.'

'Lakshmana placed that fierce, glowing missile looking like the staff of God of death on Atikaya.'

'The night ranger, seeing the missile charged with fire god coming towards him, released the glowing arrow charged with the power of Sun god.'

'Both the arrows effulgent, flaming with fire, were like angry serpents in the sky striking one another violently.'

'Those two burning one another and themselves burning had fallen on the earth surface with no fire. Those two best of arrows though glowing, having fallen on earth did not shine as they ceased to emit flames and had been reduced to ashes.'

'Then Atikaya seized with anger discharged Ishikam presided over by Twashta (the architect of gods). Saumithri then split the arrow with one presided by Indra and split Ishikam.'

"Annoyed by his arrow Ishikam being struck, Atikaya, son of Ravana charged Lakshmana's arrow with an arrow presided over by Yama."

'Then the night ranger shattered the arrow of Lakshmana and in turn released an arrow presided by Vayu.'

'And then enraged Lakshmana covered with water like a rainy cloud would shower with torrents.'

"On those arrows touching Atikaya's diamond like body, the pointed arrows shattered the coat covering the body and the broken coat of nails had fallen down."

'Lakshmana of great fame, subduer of enemy looking at the arrows becoming useless mighty hero released thousand arrows.'

'Though covered with arrows showered on him, mighty Rakshasa Atikaya had an impenetrable shield in the battlefield and could not feel the torment.'

'Atikaya released an arrow resembling a poisonous serpent at Lakshmana. Pierced in vital part Saumithri, the tormentor of the enemy lost consciousness for a while.'

'Then mighty subduer of enemies, regaining senses, getting up destroyed the chariot pole with rain of arrows. Taking up four best arrows he struck down the chariot, charioteer, and the horses.'

'Saumithri, son of Sumithra, was not able to inflict injury on that Rakshasa with those arrows, though desiring to kill him.'

'Wind god (Vayu) having come to the best of men, Lakshmana, spoke to him that in battle it is not possible to injure him or kill him.'

"By the boon given by Brahma his body is covered with armour which can't be broken. By Brahma's weapon only you can strike to kill him because of his armour and might. By any other weapon it is not possible to kill him."

"Then Saumithri who is equal to Indra hearing wind god's words invoked Brahma's weapon into service. While he was charging into his arrows and fixing the arrow went at terrific speed."

'As Saumithri charged the sharp pointed foremost arrow, the directions, moon, Sun and other planets and the sky, earth, and all space shook.'

"Golden feathered arrow, which resembled thunderbolt, was released on Atikaya, enemy of Indra for whom it was like a messenger of death. It was charged with Brahma's mystic by Saumithri and released on fixing it."

'Atikaya saw the arrow of Lakshmana coming at a speed, which possessed the velocity of the wind, fixed with feathers resembling the wings of Garuda in the battle.'

'As Atikaya was looking at the arrow, Lakshmana struck many arrows forcibly with sharp arrows possessing the speed of Garuda. The arrows reached towards Atikaya.'

'Perceiving the glowing arrow coming, like the spirit of death, Atikaya struck it with unceasing effort with javelins, spears, maces, axes, tridents and even arrows.'

'This great arrow of Lakshmana glowing like fire rendered the weapons in wonderful shapes released by Atikaya unsuccessful and severed the head of Atikaya decked with a crown.'

"Struck by Lakshmana's arrow, the crowned head of Atikaya fell on the ground like Himalaya peak."

'All the Rakshasas who escaped from killing, felt distressed seeing the king and his ornaments scattered on the ground.'

'All the Rakshasas with desperate looks, their pride hurt, became very sad and burst into discordant tones roared aloud.'

'With Leader killed, the night rangers were afraid. Listless they ran quickly towards Lanka.'

'Enemy who was difficult to approach and of terrible might being killed, the Vanaras were extremely delighted. Their faces looked like lotuses in bloom. Filled with joy they worshipped Lakshmana.'

'On hearing that Atikaya was killed by highly energetic Lakshmana, the king was overtaken by emotion and spoke as follows.'

'"Dhumraksha, a highly intolerant one, Akampana, the foremost of the Rakshasas and skilled in the use of bow and arms, in the same way Prahastha, Kumbhakarna of stupendous valour and heroes among Rakshasas desiring for combat, who have never been defeated and conquerors of hostile armies, have been killed. Great heroes of huge body, skilled in the use of many weapons and other warriors have been killed by Rama."'

'"Both the famous brothers, Rama and Lakshmana were bound with arrows by my heroic son Indrajith who is conferred with boons and whose strength is well known.'

'"That formidable bond which could not be undone by Devatas, mighty Demons, Yakshas, Gandharvas, and Kinnaras got released by both the brothers, Rama and Lakshmana by their powers and conjuring tricks which are not known to me."'

'" All those heroes who have gone by my order for combat, have been killed in the battle by mighty Vanaras."'

'"I do not see any warrior who will be able to wage with that Lakshmana, or his army, or with Sugriva, Vibheeshana or with Rama to put an end to them."'

'"Rama\'s valour is great the strength of his missiles is great, and his valour is formidable. Rakshasas can\'t stand his range."'

'"This city and even the Ashoka grove where Sita is kept secretly to be guarded by being vigilant on all sides."'

'"Wherever the troops are posted here and there be it exit, or entrance should be checked again and again and not to go out."'

'"Surrounded by the army on all sides, whoever it may be, keep watching the movement of Vanaras."'

'" At all times, whether it is evening or midnight or early morning, Vanaras movements are to be watched by the army without indifference. Indeed, the army should be active or inactive, standing, advancing constantly and staying wherever they are."'

'On hearing the words of the king of Lanka all Rakshasas and the great army got up.'

'Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, enjoined the Rakshasas and himself bearing the thorn of wrath, entered the abode desperately.'

'Then the Rakshasas who survived the killings, hurriedly reported to the Rakshasa king, Ravana about the killing of Devanthaka, Trisira and Atikaya.'

'There upon the king, getting to know suddenly about the dreadful killing of his son and brother lost his senses. His eyes were filled with tears, and he was thinking seriously.'

'Thereafter, seeing the desperate Rakshasa king immersed in a sea of sorrow, Indrajith, son of Ravana, foremost of the chariot riders, submitted as follows.'

'"Dear king of Rakshasas! Do not give way to despair when Indrajith is alive. Indeed, struck by Indrajith\'s arrows in battle it is not possible for anyone to be with life."'

'"Now you will see Rama along with Lakshmana also, their body torn into pieces along with their army their life ceased, lying on the ground pierced with arrows all over the limbs."'

'"Listen to this vow of Indra\'s enemy, which is fully determined and combined with manliness and divinity. I shall put an end to Rama and Lakshmana with my wonderful arrows."'

'"Today, Indra, Vishnu, Mitra, Sadhyas, Vysvanara, moon and Sun will witness my immeasurable prowess as they witnessed the terrible prowess of Vishnu at the fire sacrifice of Bali."'

'(Indrajith) having spoken in that manner, taking leave of the king, the enemy of Indra (the ruler of gods), ascended the chariot swift as wind in speed, drawn by the best of donkeys.'

"Highly energetic he (Indrajith) was, a tamer of enemies, seated in the chariot that was like Indra's, quickly went to the battlefield from there."

'Many Rakshasas of terrific valour, endowed with extraordinary strength, happily, wielding excellent bows, taking barbed missiles, hammers, whetted axes, maces, Bhusandi mallets, Ayasthis, Sataghnis, and Parighas, making noise, went following great Indrajith. Some went on the back of elephants and horses, tigers as large as mountains, scorpions, cats, donkeys, and camels. As well as on serpents, lions, tigers, and jackals.'

'The Rakshasas went on praising the enemy of Indra, Indrajith, making noise, blowing conchs in full blast, beating drums.'

'He, the destroyer of foes went with white parasols like a full moon shine in the sky.'

'Thereafter the chief hero went decked with golden ornaments, fanned by archers holding whisks with gold handles.'

'Ravana, the prosperous king of Rakshasas, seeing his son sallying forth surrounded by huge army spoke.'

'"Son! there is no adversary who can fight with you sitting in a chariot. Indra has been won by you. What to say about mortals like Rama who can be assailed by you."Rakshasa king having spoken that way, Indrajith accepted the blessings and departed.'

'Then Lanka shone like the Sun in the sky with Indrajith who was effulgent like the Sun and matchless in valour shone.'

'Upon reaching the battlefield, he, the tamer of foes, highly energetic Indrajith, ranged the Rakshasas around the chariot.'

'Then the foremost of Rakshasas, who was like fire god in brilliance worshipped fire god with chanting of mantras as per tradition.'

'The heroic Rakshasa king worshipped according to tradition with flowers and fragrance followed by parched grain and fire god.'

'In that fire sacrifice, weapons were leaves, bibika sticks were fuel, red pieces of cloth were used, and in the same way the ladle for sacrifice was made of iron.'

'There he strewed into the fire, lances as leaves, dark coloured live go at clasped by its neck and consigned.'

'From the fire set ablaze by the of fearing of fire sticks into it was free from smoke burst into flames indicating victory.'

'He, with whom weapons are adept invoked weapon presided over by Brahma and charged his own chariot with it.'

'While the missile was being invoked and fire sacrifice was done, all planets, moon, Sun, and Stars in the sky shook in fear.'

'Flaming like fire god, endowed with the prowess of Indra, possessing inconceivable form, Indrajith with his bow, arrows and chariot disappeared into the sky.'

'Then, the Rakshasa army filled with horses and chariots, graced with pennants and flags, desiring to fight went roaring aloud.'

'They began to strike Vanaras, with many wonderfully decorated, sharp and swift arrows, lances, and tridents.'

'Thereafter enraged Ravana\'s son looking at the Rakshasas said, "Be happy and kill the Vanaras in fight."'

'Thereafter the Rakshasas roaring and longing for victory rained arrows in a terrific manner at the Vanaras.'

'Indrajith, remaining concealed and surrounded by Rakshasas, destroyed the Vanaras with nalikas, steel arrows and maces.'

'Struck in the battle by Indrajith, the Vanaras rained heavily armed with trees and rocks.'

'Mighty and energetic son of Ravana, Indrajith became angry and began to attack the Vanaras.'

'Filled with anger, Indrajith alone with nine, five, seven arrows tore the Vanaras into pieces.'

'Hero Indrajith, who is difficult to conquer in battle, killed the Vanaras with sun like arrows decorated with gold.'

'Pierced by arrows in the battle, those Vanaras with their necks broken, giving up hopes of winning, frustrated, fell like the demons oppressed by great gods.'

"Then the bulls among Vanaras rushed in the battlefield towards Indrajith whose arrows were dreadful and blazing like the Sun 's rays."

'Then Vanaras with their bodies broken, courage and consciousness lost, blood flowed from mutilated bodies.'

'Vanaras, armed with rocks in the battle, roaring and not turning back, stood for the cause, giving up their life.'

"The Vanaras retreated back to the battle and rained on Ravana's son, trees, mountains and rocks."

'Energetic Indrajith, who is ever victorious in battle dispersed the deadly rain of rocks and trees capable of taking out life.'

'Then the Lord of Rakshasas dispersed the complete army of Vanaras with arrows burning like fire and resembling venomous serpents.'

'He shattered Gandhamadana with eighteen very sharp arrows and Nala standing at far with nine arrows.'

'Indrajith, the eminent hero, hurt Mainda in private parts and even afflicted Gaja with five spades in the battle.'

'Then he struck Jambavan with ten, Neela with thirty, and Sugriva, Rshaba and Angada. In the same way Dwivida with sharp and terrific arrows that were bestowed upon him as boons and made them lose consciousness.'

'Highly enraged like the fire at the time of universal destruction, he tormented many chiefs of Vanaras and others.'

'He, with his swift moving arrows, bright like the Sun , stretching to the ear hurt many vanaras in that great war.'

'Seeing the vast Vanara army deluded by the net of arrows, Indrajith was very happy.'

'Highly energetic, mighty, and swift Indrajith raining sharp arrows and weapons quickly Devastated the Vanara army.'

'Leaving from his own army space, moving swiftly, remaining concealed in the blue sky like a rain cloud, Indrajith rained a net of arrows.'

"In the battle, the Vanaras who were like mountains, became victims of cheating, and were struck by Indrajith's thunderbolt like arrows. Their bodies were broken and shrieking in discordant tones they fell like mountains."

'The Vanara troops saw only the sharp pointed arrows covering them. They could not see the enemy of Indra being concealed by magical power.'

'Thereafter the mighty Lord of Rakshasas despatched volley of sharp tipped arrows bright like the Sun, at Vanara leaders on all sides and eradicated.'

'He rained a violent shower of tridents, swords and axes burning like sacrificial fire shedding flames with fire sparks on the Vanara army.'

"Struck by Indrajith's arrows, the (bodies of) Vanara troops were glowing like Kimsuka trees (red in colour) bearing flowers."

'Hit by the Rakshasa king, the bulls among Vanaras gliding towards one another roared in discordant tones and fell down.'

'Some Vanaras looking up to the sky eyes pierced with arrows held one another and fell on the ground.'

'Indrajith, the foremost of the Rakshasas, with lances, tridents, sharp arrows charged with mantras pierced at all the tigers among Vanaras --Hanuman, Sugriva, Angada, Gandhamadanam, Jambavantha, Sushena, Vegadarsi, Mainda, Dwivida, Neela, Gavaksha, Vidyuuhamshtra, and monkeys Suryanana, Jyothimukha, Dadhimukha, Pavaksha, and also Nala, Kumuda.'

'Having hurt the Vanara leaders with maces and arrows shining like gold, he rained volley of arrows shining like sun rays on Lakshmana and Rama.'

'Most wonderful and prosperous Rama, looking at the rain of arrows continuing to shower, not minding it as if they are rain of water drops, spoke this to Lakshmana.'

'"Lakshmana! Rakshasa king, an enemy of Indra afflicted the Vanaras with the Brahmastram secured by him. Using that power, he is tormenting us with sharp arrows."'

'"How can it be possible now to destroy that great Indrajith who is conferred with boons of invincibility by the creator Brahma, who is steadfast and is concealed in dreadful form with weapons uplifted?"'

'"This weapon of him (Indrajith) is that of the glorious creator and is presided by Him. By that reason he is inconceivable. O! Wise Lakshmana, remain calm and undisturbed at this hail of arrows."'

'"This Rakshasa king is covered thickly with volley of arrows on all sides. Able warriors of Vanaras are falling and not happy."'

'"This Indrajith is desisting from comb at on seeing us. As the Vanaras have lost pride and happiness and fallen into unconscious state, he would surely think that he has attained prosperity after victory in war and surely enter Lanka, the abode of enemies of god."'

'Seeing the two princes severed and fallen down struck by the net of arrows of Indrajith, he roared happily in the battle.'

"Thereafter Vanara army withdrew from the battle along with Rama and Lakshmana. Indrajith for his part moved to the abode protected by Ravana's arms, while being praised. He at once entered the city happily and related everything to the father.", '।। इत्यार्षेवाल्मीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेत्रिसप्ततितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the Seventy third sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by Sage Valmiki.'

'The two brothers (Rama and Lakshmana) become unconscious in the forefront of the battle the monkey leaders lose senses. Sugriva, Neela, Angada and Jambavantha did not know What to do.'

'Thereafter, foremost among the wise, Vibheeshana observing the despondency of the monkey leaders spoke to them reassuring in incomparable words.'

'"O Noble men! Do not fear. Rama and Lakshmana are afflicted by Indrajith\'s volley of arrows and have lost senses. They are despondent to honour the statement of the creator not otherwise."'

'To him (Indrajith), the creator has conferred this weapon of Brahma endowed with terrific speed. To respect the missile both the princes have fallen. Why do you grieve?'

"Thereafter, hearing Vibheeshana's words, wise Hanuman spoke this with respect to the missile of Brahma."

'"Whoever is strong among Vanaras, have been struck and are alive breathing among the Vanaras. Let us restore their confidence."'

'The two heroes, Hanuman and Vibheeshana, and the foremost of Rakshasas with torch in hand searched for the left over Vanaras in the battlefield.'

'Two of them saw the ground covered with Vanaras of mountainlike forms, who had fallen with tails cut off, some with broken thighs, broken legs and fingers, necks severed, letting off blood, discharging urine and glowing weapons lying on the ground.'

'Vibheeshana and Hanuman saw in the battlefield Sugriva, Angada, Neela, Sarabha, Gandhamadana, Gavaksha, Sushena, Vegadarsi, Ahuka, Mainda, Nala, Jyothimukha, Dwivida and Panasa struck down.'

"By the creator's missile Indrajith struck down sixtyseven crores of strong Vanaras between the fifth and last part of the day."

'Vibheeshana and Hanuman seeing the ocean of Vanara army and the glowing arrows on them, looked for Jambavantha.'

'Paulastya (Vibheeshana of Paulastya clan), seeing the son of Prajapathi (Jambavan), who by nature was wise and aged, afflicted by hundreds of arrows, like a cooling fire sacrifice, went close by and spoke these words.'

'"O Noble Jambavan! Indeed, your life has not been afflicted with these sharp arrows." Hearing this, Jambavan uttered these words with difficulty."'

'"Great hero, Vibheeshana! I recognise you by your voice. Pierced with sharp arrows I am not able to see you."'

'Vibheeshana (Rakshasa)! Indeed, Hanuman, the foremost of Vanaras, by whose birth, Anjana and Supraja are blessed as parents, are they alive?'

'After hearing Jambavantha, Vibheeshana said "Noble son, why are you enquiring about Hanuman?"'

'"Noble one! You are showing affection to Hanuman but not to King Sugriva, or Angada or even Raghava?"'

'On hearing Vibheeshana, the tiger among Rakshasas, Jambavan replied, "Listen why I enquired about Maruthi."'

'If this hero Hanuman is alive, even if the army is destroyed and if we are alive, it is like dead only.'

'"Dear! If Hanuman who is equal to wind god, resembles Vyshvanara (God of fire) is breathing, then we can hope to live (for life)."'

'Thereafter, Hanuman the son of the wind god coming close to the aged Jambavan clasped his feet in accordance with tradition and greeted him.'

'Then again, Jambavan whose senses were affected, on hearing the statement of Hanuman, the foremost of Vanaras, felt as though he was born again.'

'Then brilliant Jambavan spoke to Hanuman, the tiger among Vanaras, on reaching him. "You ought to protect the Vanaras."'

'"You are fully endowed with prowess and great friend of monkeys in that way. It is time for you to show your talent. Indeed, I do not see anyone else."'

'For the Bears and Vanaras, create excessive happiness. For Rama and Lakshmana who are unconscious, make them comfortable.'

'"Hanuman, you ought to go very far over the sea to the Himalayas, the highest mountain."'

'"O Destroyer of enemies! there on top you will see the foremost of the mountain Rshaba and on the peak of Kailasa."'

'"Heroic Hanuman! In the middle of those two mountains, you will see a highly splendid mountain covered with all kinds of medicinal herbs."'

'"O Tiger among monkeys! You will see on the summit four medicinal herbs growing there illuminating the ten directions."'

'"Mrtasanjivani, Visalyakarani, Suvarnakarani, Sandhani, all these herbs are grown there."'

'"Hanuman, taking the four herbs you, the son of wind god ought to return immediately with the speed of wind, to unite the life of the monkeys and reassure."'

'"Hearing the instruction of Jambavantha, the son of the wind god, infused with wind speed as the ocean, heaves with the force of wind increasing his strength fully."'

'Standing on the summit of the foremost of the mountains, hero Hanuman pressing his feet seemed like a second mountain'

'Trodden by the feet of Hanuman that mountain pressed forcibly by himself could not bear his strength.'

'Oppressed by the speed of Hanuman, the mountain fell to the ground and by the impetuosity of his speed the mountain got shattered.'

'As the foremost of the mountain got oppressed it crushed the trees and rocks on it and Vanaras were unable to stand on it.'

'Then the mighty gates of Lanka shaking, homes shattered, stricken with fear that night it seemed Lanka was dancing.'

'Son of the wind god, who was like a mountain supported by earth, pressing hard caused the earth with its ocean to shake.'

'From that mountain the monkey sprang to Malaya Mountain which was like Meru and Mandara mountains. It was set with various springs, covered with various trees and creepers, abounded with lotuses, frequented by Devas, Gandharvas. It was sixty yojanas high and visited by Vidhyadharas, celestial nymphs, and sages, filled with various species of deer and numerous caves. Yakshas, Gandharvas, and Kinnaras were living there. There the son of the wind god grew in size like a cloud.'

'Pressing the mountain hard by his feet, opening his largemouth wide, he roared like Rakshasas to make Rakshasas fearful.'

'All the Rakshasas in Lanka hearing the loud roar of Hanuman were afraid and could not stir from there.'

'Maruti, scorcher of enemies, endowed with terrific valour offered prayers to Sri Rama and made up his mind to embark on the stupendous task for Raghava.'

'Raising his tail which resembled a serpent, bending his back, and ears, opening his mouth wide expounded Hanuman sprang up at terrific speed.'

'By the speed of his arms and thighs clusters of branches of trees, mountains, rocks, and common monkeys were attracted, and with reduction of speed along the way the rocks fell.'

'Stretching his arms which resembled coils of serpents, whose valour equalled Garuda, enemy of serpents, as if attracting all the directions went to the summit of the foremost mountain which equalled Meru mountain.'

"Observing the ocean whose waves were made to revolve round (by his speed), exceedingly, whose creatures were made to whirl round violently (by the wind force generated by his speed), he went forth like the wheel loosened from Vishnu's hand."

"Watching the mountains, trees, birds, rivers, tanks, the best of cities, all of them and prosperous people, he went at his father's speed."

'Hanuman who was equal to his father in prowess, went unwearied, hurriedly in the path of the Sun.'

'Maruthi, the tiger among monkeys went like the wind possessing great speed filling sound in all directions.'

"Going at wind speed, the great monkey Maruthi, remembering Jambavantha's words, reached and sighted the Himalayas."

'He reached the foremost of mountains, which was adorned with different kinds of springs, many caves and cascades and graced with trees. The peaks were like masses of white autumn clouds graced with splendour and beautiful to look at.'

'Reaching there he saw the tall and terrifying peaks of the Lord of mountains frequented by Devatas and sages, meritorious hermitages.'

"He saw the seat of Brahma, the abode of Rajathanabha, the abode of Indra, the location from which Rudra discharged an arrow (at Tripura), the abode of Lord Hayagriva, and glowing abode of the deity presiding over Brahmastra and Vyvasvatah's attendants."

"He saw Vajralayam (where Brahma gave Indra the thunderbolt), the abode of Kubera shining like the Sun, the spot where the Sun was bound, Brahma's abode and the abode of the bow of Lord Siva, and the earth navel."

'He saw Kailas, the rocks of Himalayas, that way on the Rshaba the foremost Lord Siva, the golden mountain, and the great mountain on which grew, glowing medicinal herbs.'

'Observing the herbs blazing like fire, he was astonished at the herbs on the mountain and went round thinking of the names of herbs (asked by Jambavan).'

'The great monkey, son of the wind god, having traversed a thousand yojanas began to range the wonderful herbs and went about searching.'

'Perceiving a seeker coming for them, the herbs all over the wonderful mountain disappeared.'

'The great soul Hanuman was not able to see, those herbs, became angry and his eyes were burning like fire in anger. He jumped up and roared and said to the lordly mountain.'

'"O King of mountains! You are not showing compassion to Raghava. Is it your determination to be like this? Overcome by my shoulder strength I shall crush you now. You may see."'

'Seizing hold of the peaks vehemently, its trees, elephants, gold mines withthousands of minerals he crushed the projections and set fire and burnt and uprooted swiftly.'

"Striking terror among Devatas and demons and leaders inhabiting the world, uprooting the mountain he hurried at Garuda's speed into the sky praised by aerial creatures."

'Resembling the Sun closely, radiant like the Sun he was taking the top of the mountain, betaking himself in the vicinity of the Sun he was like another Sun.'

'He, the son of the wind god sitting upon the crag, was delightful like Vishnu with a flaming wheel shining.'

'Observing him high the Vanaras became joyful, and he also saw them. Hearing their loud noise becoming aware of the Rakshasas of Lanka also roared in terrible fear.'

'The great Hanuman along with the mountain descended in the midst of the Vanara army, and greeted the army head bent down and embraced Vibheeshana standing there.'

'The two sons of the ruler of men inhaling the fragrance of the herbs became free from wounds. Other Vanara heroes also got restored.'

'All those Vanara warriors killed were restored with life instantly by the fragrance. Those who were asleep also got up when they became fully awake.'

"From the beginning of the war in Lanka till the end without exception, all the Rakshasas were killed in war by the Vanara leaders then and there were thrown into the ocean by Ravana's instruction, not to have means of proof."

'Sugriva, the king of Vanaras called Hanuman to make him know the task ahead and said these words.'

'" As Kumbhakarna is killed and his sons are destroyed, Ravana may not putup defence again. I think."'

'"Of the bulls among vanaras, endowed with prowess, whoever is quick, able and foremost, let them go to Lanka, the abode of Ravana."'

'Thereafter the bulls among Vanaras turned their faces towards Lanka and went holding torches in hand, after the Sun set as the frightening night started.'

'Vanara troops went all over with torches and chased by them, the Rakshasas at the gates ran instantly.'

'Rejoiced Vanaras set fire to the towering gates, attics, different streets as well as mansions to send away Rakshasas.'

'Then thousands of their houses were burnt by fire (consumer of offerings), and mountain like mansions collapsed to the ground.'

'There, in Lanka, incense and the best of sandalwood was burnt. Nay even glossy pearls, gems and diamonds were also burnt.'

'Their white linen and beautiful silks were burnt. Nay, even several blankets of wool, chests and weapons were also burnt.'

'Different kinds of peculiar kinds of ornaments used to decorate horses, ornaments worn round the neck and girths of elephants, and polished chariot decorations.'

'Leather armour of the warriors, shields of horses, excellent bow strings, swords, arrows, goads, lances, and javelins.'

'With fire all over, rugs made of hair of animals, whisks made of fur of animals, tiger skins, musk, wonderful pearls, and gems in laid dwellings of many kinds, and clusters of war weapons were burnt.'

'The fire consumed many kinds of wonderful homes of Rakshasas, with loved ones on the best beds, their armour made of gold Rakshasas decked with garland s and best of attire their eyes inebriated with intoxication, shaking while walking slowly, holding their loved ones, seized with anger against enemies, holding mace and tridents in hand, eating, drinking and sleeping on the best beds, fast asleep some out of fear taking their sons going quickly and all of them dwelling there in hundreds and thousands were burning again and again.'

'The fire consumed the houses which were strong and impenetrable, with many enclosures, magnificent ones, constructed in gold in the shape of a half moon and full moon, windows endowed with wonderful pictures. All over the rooms were high on top, decorated with gems, and as if touching the Sun. It was rendered noisy with notes of herons and peacocks, playing of Veena, and jingling of ornaments like the vibration of sounds. The dwellings which looked like mountains were consumed by fire.'

'The archways covered with a touch of fire shone like lightning in summer, girt round like clusters of clouds.'

'The mansions burnt by fire fell down like a huge mountain struck by a thunderbolt.'

"The lovely women sleeping in burnt mansion tops screamed loudly in desperation saying 'Alas! Oh Oh!' and removing their ornaments."

'Like peaks of mountains struck by thunderbolt the mansions also fell, caught in fire.'

'As the mansions were burning, they shone like the peaks of Himalayas glowing at a distance.'

'While the tops of dwellings were burning, flames were blazing, and Lanka seemed adorned with Kimsuka blossoms.'

'In Lanka with the elephants set free, horses set free by the guards, it was like an agitated ocean at the end of the world cycle.'

'Some horses that were released, went in different directions afraid of elephants. Some elephants seeing horses ran away in fear.'

'While Lanka was burning its image reflected in the ocean made the ocean look like an ocean of red waters.'

'Set fire by the monkeys, in a short while, the city was like a land flaming out of dreadful destruction in the world.'

'By the smoke that spread, scorched by the fire, the clamour of the women folk at the top of their voice was heard at a hundred yojanas.'

'And thereafter the monkeys who were eager to fight assailed the Rakshasas who came out suddenly unable to bear the burning of the bodies.'

'The clamour of the monkeys and the sighing of the Rakshasas resounded in all the ten directions including the ocean as well as the earth.'

'The two great souls, Rama, and Lakshmana, both relieved of pain seized hold of excellent and wellknown bows.'

'Then Rama drew the best of bow, that created fear among the Rakshasas by its tumultuous sound.'

'Then, great Rama stretching his bow in great fury shone as though the divine Lord Siva was stretching his bow with imprints of Vedas.'

"That sound of the twang of Rama's bow could be heard very high over and above the sounds of the Vanaras and Rakshasas."

"The sound of Rama's bow twang, the clamour of the Vanaras as well as the wailing of Rakshasas, all the three could be heard in all ten directions."

'The entrance gate of Lanka, which was like Kailasa, crumbled and fell by the shaft released from the bow of Rama.'

"Seeing Rama's arrows on the highrise mansions and houses, the Rakshasa leaders started preparing for comb at out of fear."

'As the Rakshasa leaders were preparing (for attack) and emitting leonine roar, night came upon like the night of Rudra (night of final dissolution).'

'Sugriva the great king of Vanaras commanded all the bulls among Vanaras, to encounter after reaching the gate of Lanka. "He who is staying wherever they are does not obey the king\'s command will be killed for being guilty of flouting the command", ordered Sugriva to the Vanaras.'

'Holding burning torches in hand the Vanara chiefs reached and standing at the gate, saw that Ravana was overtaken by anger.'

"The ten directions were disturbed violently by his yawning and his wrath was perceptible like Rudra' s form in his limbs by his wrath."

'Seized with anger, he sent for Kumbha and Nikumbha, both the sons of Kumbhakarna and many Rakshasas.'

'Yupaksha, Sonithaksha, Prajangha, Kampana set out with both the sons of Kumbhakarna.'

'Roaring like a lion, he ordered all the Rakshasas of extraordinary strength to proceed instantly.'

'Ordered by him again and again, the Rakshasa warriors went from Lanka with glowing weapons offering salutations to him.'

'The Rakshasas by the effulgence of ornaments and by themselves illumined all over the sky like monkeys did with torches.'

'There the radiance of the moon and stars and the splendour of their ornaments brightened the sky.'

'The moon light and the splendour of the ornaments, also the light of shining ocean and dwellings lit up the Vanara and Rakshasa armies.'

'There the waves of the ocean shone brightly getting united with the fire of half burnt houses.'

'Then the Rakshasa army appeared terrific, fixed with flags and poles, equipped with best of axes, horses yoked to formidable chariots and elephants different kinds of foot soldiers, distinguished by wielding shining tridents, maces, swords spears and lances warriors of frightening valour and prowess holding shining barbed missiles hundreds of tiny bells tied to the chariots and elephants making noise  warriors endowed with arms decorated with gold, with axes and weapons to pierce arrows fixed to the bows, with an abundance of fragrance.'

'Crowded with fierce warriors coming like thundering rainy clouds, the Rakshasas, and the monkey troops coming forward made loud noises with an elevated tone.'

'The great army of Rakshasas rushed towards the hostile army just as moths flew up towards flame.'

'Their Clubs and Asanis brandished by rubbing with their arms, the great army of Rakshasas appeared very bright.'

'Thereafter the monkeys eager to fight with night rangers rose as if gone mad striking the night rangers with trees and rocks.'

'When the Rakshasas showed up in that manner, the monkeys approaching them cut off their heads instantly with sharp swords.'

'The Rakshasas with ears bitten off by the teeth of the monkeys, skulls smashed with fists, and limbs broken with blows of rocks they moved about.'

'In the aforesaid manner the Vanaras struck more night rangers of terrific appearance, great heroes in front of them with sharp swords.'

'One struck another, who was striking the other. One threw down another who was throwing the other. One abused another reproaching contemptuously, and one bit his rival biting the other.'

"There they conversed this way with one another 'One said hit me and another one offered to hit,', again another intervened and said, 'Why are you crying?' meaning I offer resistance, one said 'Why are you suffering like this?'."

'Highly enraged Vanaras and Rakshasas fought with them, raiment slipping, shields and weapons dodged, huge lances lifted to fight. They used fists, tridents, spears, and swords.'

'In that fight the Rakshasas killed the Vanaras at the rate of ten to seven and the Vanaras struck down Rakshasas at the rate of ten to seven.'

'While the fierce fight brought destruction of heroes in the ongoing combat, Angada eager to fight, assailed gallant Kampana.'

'Kampana struck Angada challenging himin anticipation. He swiftly hurled a mace in anger and hurt him grievously and Angada reeled.'

'Rejuvenated Angada, after gaining consciousness acquired a mountain peak and shattered Kampana with a blow. wounded Kampana fell down.'

'Then seeing Kampana killed, Sonitaksha, a fearless hero, quickly reached Angada by chariot.'

'He (Sonitaksha) swiftly pierced with pointed shafts resembling fire raging at the time of dissolution and struck Angada with arrows known by names, Ksura, Ksurapra, Naracha, Vatsadanta, Silimukha, Karni, Salya, vipada and many sharp arrows.'

'Courageous son of Vali, the mighty Angada encountered with vigour and crumbled the formidable bow (of Sonitaksha), his chariot and arrows.'

'Thereupon enraged Sonitaksha, quickly sprang up to the sky at high speed with sword and shield.'

'Mighty Angada springing up at a higher speed grasped his (Sonitaksha) hand and irritated him with a sword making loud noise.'

'Then Angada pierced his sword on the fl at surface of his shoulder diagonally and cut him with his sword.'

"Vali's son, seizing that great sword again and again, roaring to finally terminate the remaining Rakshasas, went forward."

'Sonitha adorned with golden armlets taking hold of iron mace rushed behind Angada.'

"Then mighty Yupaksha, and Prajaghna for his part in fury assailed mighty Angada's chariot."

'Angada, the foremost of Vanaras, coming between both Sonitaksha and Prajaghna shone like a full moon between the Visakha stars.'

'Both Mainda and Dwivida (maternal uncles of Angada) took position for the protection of one another facing the enemy.'

'Rakshasas wielding swords and mace, endowed with stupendous strength and of huge body agitated and assailed Vanaras.'

'A momentous war took place between the three Rakshasas (Prajaghna, Yupaksha and Sonitaksha) and Vanara chiefs (Angada, Dwivida and Mainda) that caused horripilation.'

'In the comb at the Vanaras seizing hold of trees hurled violently and mighty Prajaghna with his sword shattered them'

'In that war the Vanaras hurled trees, rocks on chariots and horses and Yupaksha encountered them and tore them.'

'Heroic and courageous Sonitaksha tore the trees hurled by Dwivida and Mainda in midway by his mace and crushed them.'

'Prajaghna taking up a huge sword went forward swiftly and assailed Angada.'

'Then Vanara leader Angada who was endowed with extraordinary strength, seeing Prajaghna of stupendous power coming forward, hit him with Aswakarna tree.'

'Angada hit the shoulder of Prajaghna which held the sword, with his fist. By that blow the sword got broken and dropped down'

'Seeing the pestle shaped sword fallen on the ground, mighty Prajaghna clenched his fist, which was as hard as the thunderbolt.'

'Sonitaksha of extraordinary energy hit at the forehead of highly valiant Angada. For a while Angada was unable to move.'

'Son of Vali, who was full of vigour, on regaining consciousness hit Prajaghna on the head and trunk and made him fall down.'

'Instantly alighting from the chariot, Yupaksha seeing the uncle exhausted and hurt, eyes filled with tears, he wielded the sword.'

'Observing Yupakasha fallen and rushing quickly, furious Dwivida struck him in the bosom with force and caught him'

'Then seeing the brother caught, mighty Sonitaksha struck Dwivida in the bosom by a mace.'

'Dwivida, though mighty reeled and could not move when struck by Sonitaksha. He got up and again and snatched the mace from Sonithaksha.'

'In the meantime, valiant Vanara leader Mainda arrived and struck with his palm on the chest of Yupaksha.'

'In that fight, courageous Sonitaksha and Yupaksha contested with the two monkeys pulling one another violently and throwing intensely.'

'Valiant Dwivida, for his part, tore Sonitaksha on his face with his nails, and quickening his pace threw him on the surface of the ground and bruised him.'

'Vanara leader, Mainda on his part, angrily pierced Yupaksha many times who fell on the ground dead.'

"Then many heroes died, Rakshasa king's army was distressed and went towards where Kumbhakarna's son was fighting."

'Kumbha quickly restored the confidence of the troops. Then energetic Kumbha seeing the eminent heroes of Rakshasa army struck down, he found a favourable opportunity and drew up an excellent strategy and performed an extremely difficult deed in the battlefield.'

'He (Kumbha), the foremost wielder of bow, taking up the bow, remaining fully composed released arrows that resembled poisonous serpents capable of tearing the flesh.'

'Those best arrows fixed to the bow were shining like the cloud with flashes of lightning, and like a second bow of Indra.'

'Then he struck Dwivida with a golden shafted arrow that was loosened to kill by stretching the bow till the ear and released.'

'Struck all of a sudden, the foremost Vanara (Dwivida) alarmed, fell with legs, outstretched, trembling.'

'Seeing the brother shattered in the great combat, Mainda on his part seizing a huge rock rushed swiftly.'

'The mighty Vanara (Mainda) for his part hurled the rock to crush the Rakshasa. Kumbha attacked him with five sharp arrows and rock got broken.'

"Haughty Kumbha, fixed a charming arrow resembling a venomous serpent and struck at Dwivida's brother."

'That blow hit the Vanara leader in his private parts, and Mainda lost consciousness and fell down.'

'Seeing the two maternal uncles fallen, Angada, who was endowed with great strength, attacked Kumbha, wielding a bow.'

'Kumbha seeing Angada advancing towards him, with five steel arrows and three shafts pierced him just as an elephant is pierced with lances.'

'Kumbha, a valiant hero pierced Angada continuously with several sharp and pointed arrows decked with gold.'

"Vali's son was not shaken by the strike, showered rain of rocks and trees on his (Kumbha) forehead."

"Prosperous Kumbhakarna's son also shattered the rocks hurled on him, breaking them."

'Kumbha observing the Vanara leader coming towards him attacked him with fire sticks and pierced his eyebrows.'

'Blood flowed from his injured eyes and his eyes got veiled by blood. Covering his eyes with one hand he took hold of a Sal tree nearby.'

'Compressing the trunk of the tree on the chest with one hand and bending forward a little its branches with another hand, he (Angada) tore Kumbha in that way in the great fight like an elephant.'

"All the Rakshasas seeing the tall tree, which was like Mandara mountain, resembling Indra's banner hurriedly was about to let loose."

'Kumbha shattered Angada with seven sharp arrows capable of tearing the body. Angada, pained by that screamed and lost his senses.'

'Seeing the foremost Vanara, Angada who was difficult to encounter fell and like sinking into the ocean of despondency, the foremost Vanaras submitted to Rama.'

'On hearing that Angada was tormented in the battlefield and pained he ordered Jambavan and the best of monkey leaders to help him.'

"On hearing Rama's command, the enraged Vanara tigers took up bows to attack Kumbha."

'Bulls among Vanaras then took trees, and rocks in hand, with their eyes red in anger started for the protection of Angada.'

"Jambavan, Sushena, Vegadarsi and other heroic Vanaras, full of anger also rushed to assail Kumbhakarna's son."

'Perceiving that great army of Vanara leaders are advancing, Kumbha obstructed them with a volley of arrows just like a mountain obstructing the path of torrent.'

"The Vanara leaders could not bear the range of arrows of Kumbhaka, just as a tide can't overstep the shore of an ocean."

"Seeing the Vanara army pained by the rain of arrows, Sugriva, the Lord of Vanaras having Angada in his rear, swiftly rushed and assailed Kumbhakarna's son just like a lion roaming in the mountains attacks elephants."

'Mighty strong he was, uprooting Aswakarna and many other several kinds of trees he hurled at them (Rakshasas).'

"Frenzied Kumbhakarna's son was torn under the shower of trees that covered space with sharp arrows which was difficult to approach."

'The sharp arrows aimed at the target by Kumbha covered the trees and they shone like dreadful Sataghnis.'

'Valiant hero, the prosperous and noble Sugriva, the chief of Vanaras did not get distressed when tormented with rain of trees.'

"He snatched the bow of Kumbha forcibly which was like Indra's rainbow, pulled it and broke, while tolerating the pain of the arrows."

'Then Sugriva leapt into the chariot, which was a difficult deed to perform, saw Kumbha who was like an elephant and whose tusks were broken and spoke.'

'"Oh, elder brother of Nikumbha! Your valour, speed of your arrows, compliance, and glory is wonderful like that of Ravana\'s."'

'"You are equal to Prahlada, Bali, Indra, Kubera and Varuna in might. You alone have taken over like your father."'

'"Oh! mightyarmed, Kumbha! wielding pike in hand, you are a tamer of enemies, you alone are the one that gods are not able to overcome, a pre eminent one who has gained over senses, highly intelligent, exhibiting your prowess and deeds before me."'

'"Your uncle Ravana is able to withstand the Devas and Danavas by virtue of the boons and Kumbhakarna was able to with stand gods and demons by virtue of his courage."'

'"Just as the wonderful conflict between Indra and Sambara let the beings witness the mighty comb at between me and you."'

'"By an unequal deed done by you in the efficiency in the use of weapons has been exhibited. The monkey heroes of terrific valour have been made to fall."'

'"O Stalwart! You have not been finished by me for the fear of reproaching. You are exhausted by your deeds and resting. Having rested, witness my strength now."'

"Sugriva's words of flattering royalty captivated Kumbha's fire of energy, which doubled like fire fed with ghee."

'Then by the trampling of their feet the earth sank down, the abode of Varuna (ocean) was agitated with rolling waves.'

'Then Sugriva lifted Kumbha and threw him into the ocean quickly, to show him the bottom.'

'By Kumbha falling into the ocean, it got swollen to the form of Vindhya and Mandara mountain and water flowed all over.'

'Then Kumbha hit Sugriva in anger with his fist at the speed of a thunderbolt on his chest.'

'The armour of Sugriva slit open, and blood flowed at high speed and excessively. The first hit of Kumbha hit the skeletal framework of Sugriva in return.'

"Then by the speed of the hit on Sugriva's chest by Kumbha's fist a flame burst forth like the flame of Meru Mountain."

'Then mighty Sugriva, the bull among Vanaras, hit by the fist, clenched his fist adamantly.'

'Sugriva, the champion pressed his first which shone like the Sun encircled with rays on the chest of Kumbha.'

'By the blow of Sugriva, that Kumbha was pained severely and overcome by fear he fell like fire which has lost its glow.'

'Struck by the fist of Sugriva, the Rakshasa fell just as the glowing planet endowed with brightness accidentally fell from the sky.'

"Struck in the chest by Sugriva's fist, Kumbha fell down and shone like the Sun god over powered by Rudra।।"

'Seeing his brother struck down by Sugriva, Nikumbha gazed at him as if to burn him in wrath.'

'Then the hero Nikumbha, girded with flowers measuring five digits in breadth, took an auspicious club like the peak of Mahendra mountain.'

"It was decked with a gold band, encrusted with diamonds and corals, in the form of Yama's rod, a fierce one which dispelled fear."

'The club was highly splendorous and of terrific strength with the banner of Indra and Nikumbha took that club roared opening his mouth wide and pierced it with force.'

"Nikumbha was shining with ornaments on his chest, golden armlets on arms, wonderful earrings and wonderful garland s holding clubs in hand, with bow like Indra's and roaring like lightning and thunder in the clouds."

'By Nikumbha whirling around the club and the conjunction of the seven winds coming in contact with the club in his hand crashed in space and glowed like a smokeless fire burst forth.'

"The heaven with the city of Vitapavati, including the excellent abodes of Gandharvas, the hosts of stars and mansions, the lunar abodes along with other planet abodes revolved round as though it was caused by the spinning of Nikumbha's club."

'The glow of the club, the ornaments, and the fire of Nikumbha that burst forth was like the fire at the time of dissolution of the universe. It was formidable for the Vanaras to reflect on.'

'The Rakshasas and even Vanaras were not able to move out of fear. Only mighty Hanuman stood there showing his chest.'

'The Rakshasa, whose arms were like iron bars and shining like the Sun brought it down on the breast of mighty Hanuman.'

'As soon as the iron club touched the broad chest (of Hanuman), it split into a hundred splinters, in the sky and crumbled.'

'The great Vanara did not move and remained steady like a mountain in an earthquake with the iron club touching him.'

'Struck by the Rakshasa, Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys of extraordinary strength clenched his fist violently.'

'Highly energetic champion endowed with speed, close to wind god in valour raising his fist instantly crushed Nikumbha on the chest.'

"Then Nikumbha's skin split, and blood started flowing, which appeared as though lightning had risen in the cloud."

'By that blow, Nikumbha was not moved. Recovering from that he caught hold of Hanuman of extraordinary strength.'

'Then seeing Hanuman endowed with might, lifted by Nikumbha in the battlefield the residents of Lanka roared terribly.'

"Even while being carried by Rakshasa also, the son of the wind god hit Kumbhakarna's son with his hard adamant fist."

'Hanuman, the son of wind god getting himself released from Nikumbha, springing up standing on the ground tormented Nikumbha.'

'Throwing down Nikumbha with great effort, Hanuman endowed with speed sprang up and fell on his chest.'

'Taking hold of the neck with both arms and twisting it round Hanuman broke off the neck of Nikumbha while he was crying terribly.'

"And thereafter as Nikumbha killed by windgod's son was crying aloud in the battlefield, a violent and fierce war took place between the highly disturbed son of Dasharatha and Rakshasa Makara."

'On hearing that Nikumbha and Kumbha had been killed, Ravana was very furious and burning in anger.'

'The Rakshasa king was overtaken by both anger and sorrow, bewildered excessively sent for broadeyed Makara, the son of Khara.'

'"Son! commanded by me, you go accompanied by arm and kill the Vanaras, Raghava and Lakshmana aslo,'

"Rejoicing to hear the words of Ravana, proclaiming himself to be a hero, Maka raksha, the son of Khara said 'good'."

'Greeting the tenheaded Rakshasa and going round him according to tradition, the mighty warrior went out from the abode early morning by the command of Ravana.'

"Khara's son spoke to the commanderinchief of the army standing nearby 'Let the chariot be brought quickly and the army proceed'."

'Upon hearing those words, the commanderinchief of the Rakshasas responded and placed the army near him.'

"After having gone round the chariot he (Makara) ascended and said to the charioteer, 'let the chariot be driven quickly'."

"Thereafter, Maka raksha spoke to all Rakshasas, 'All of you be ahead of me and fight violently'."

'"I will kill both Rama and Lakshmana in the battle, by the order of Ravana, the king of Rakshasas."'

'"Now I shall put an end to Rama and Lakshmana, Sugriva and the Vanaras with the best of arrows."'

'"Going there now, I will terminate the great Vanara army with these pikes just as drywood is burnt by fire."'

"On hearing Maka raksha's words all the mighty Rakshasas came with different kinds of weapons."

'Those who could change their form at will, cruel, with protruding teeth, yellow eyes, dishevelled hair, of frightful appearance, huge like elephants surrounding the son of Khara went joyously forward shaking the earth.'

'There was a beating of drums, blowing of thousands of conchs, clapping of arms and great sound was heard.'

"There, the long whip dropped from the charioteer's hand and the Rakshasa's standard had fallen suddenly by divine will."

'His horses yoked to the chariot went giving up their valour, faltering feet, desperate and shedding tears.'

'At the departure of evil minded and angry Maka raksha, dreadful and violent wind blew carrying with crumbling dust.'

'Seeing those portents incidentally and not taking into account those Rakshasas went where Rama and Lakshmana were.'

'On seeing Maka raksha all the Vanara chiefs returned, jumped, and stood ready enthusiastically to fight.'

'Then ensued a battle between Rakshasas and Vanaras whichcaused horripilation, just like the battle between Devas and Danavas.'

'Then monkeys as well as Rakshasas fought hurling trees and pikes and bringing down rocks and clubs physically hurting each other.'

'Those prowlers, then ight rangers discharging javelins, swords, maces, spears, lances, small swords, bhindi Palas, shafts, nooses, mallets and staff and other weapons on the lions among the monkeys, caused destruction.'

"Vanaras perturbed terribly by the volley of arrows of Khara's son were stricken with fear and ran."

'The monkeys saw all the arrogant Rakshasas roaring like lions and running as though triumphed.'

'Thereafter, seeing the Vanaras running all over, Rama stopped the Rakshasas by rain of arrows.'

'Seeing the intercepted Rakshasas, the night ranger Maka raksha was overtaken by fire of anger spoke these words.'

'"Rama Stop. Duel will take place with me. I will give you sharpened arrows from my bow and relieve you of your life."'

'"Then in Dandakaranya my father was killed. Now for the samereason you are in front of me. Seeing you my anger is increasing."'

'"O Evil minded Raghava! at that time, I did not see you in D and aka forest. My limbs are burning in anger."'

'"Rama! To my good fortune it became possible for me to see you here. Just as a hungry lion waits for an animal, I am waiting for you."'

'"Now by the speed of my arrow I will send you totherealm of Yama and there you will be along with the demons killed by you."'

'"Rama, why talk so much? Listen to my words. Let people in all worldssee you and me in the battlefield."'

'"By weapons, or by mace or else with hand s or any other weapon or with your military practice, you fight, he said to Rama."'

'Laughing at the words of Maka raksha who was speaking again and again Rama said.'

'"Rakshasa! Why so much of wasteful talk about What you can\'t accomplish? Victory is not possible on the battlefield with your force of speech"'

'"In Dandaka, fourteen thousand Rakshasas, your father, Trisira, and also Dooshana were killed by me alone."'

'"O Sinner! Today vultures, jackals and crows with sharp beaks and goads like claws will also be satiated with your flesh."'

'Spoken in that manner by Raghava in the battlefield, Maka raksha, endowed with extraordinary strength, released a volley of arrows on Rama.'

'Rama rained volley of arrows on the Rakshasa and shattered those golden feathered arrows which fell on the ground into thousands of pieces.'

"On meeting one another between Khara's son and Dasharatha's son a fierce comb at happened."

'Then the sound released by the friction of the bowstring and the hand (of the two heroes) filled the sky like thunder of clouds.'

'Devas, Danavas, Ghand arvas, Kinnaras and huge serpents all of them stood in space to look at the wonderful evil deed.'

'Even though they were piercing one another with limbs, their strength remained doubled in the battlefield. Each of them was countering the other and inflicting and hitting each other.'

'In the comb at Rakshasa split the arrows released by Rama and Rakshasa shattered the arrows released by Rama.'

'All quarters were covered by the arrows in that manner all over and even the intermediate point, the earth could not be seen.'

'Then broad shouldered Raghava was enraged and split the bow with eight steel arrows and the charioteer also.'

'Rama broke the chariot, killed the horses, and laid down the night ranger Maka raksha. Deprived of the chariot he stood on the ground.'

'Standing on the ground that Rakshasa who created fear among all beings shone like fire at the time of dissolution of the universe, seized his pike in hand.'

'Seeing that pike, which was glowing like flame, by which the quarters were glowing brightly in the sky like the flame, which had been given by Rudra, which caused fear like another weapon of destruction, all gods fled in panic in all directions.'

'The night ranger whirling round and round the glowing pike furiously hurled at Raghava in that conflict.'

"Raghava split with his three arrows the burning pike released from the hand of Khara's son while it was still flying in the sky."

'That pike, which was decorated with gold, broke into pieces, and fell down like fire sticks by the many supreme arrows of Rama.'

'Seeing the unwearied action of Raghava in destroying the pike, the beings in the sky praised him saying," well done, well done."'

'The night ranger Makaraksha seeing his pike destroyed lifting up his fist said this to Kakuthsa, "Wait, wait."'

'Then Rama the beloved of Raghus, laughing at Maka raksha, fixed missile presided by fire god.'

'Then struck in the battlefield by that missile of Kakuthsa, the Rakshasa fell down with his heart split open and died.'

"Seeing Maka raksha fall, those Rakshasas became scared of Rama's arrow and ran straight to Lanka."

'Ravana, who was always victorious in warhearing that Maka raksha had been killed, became highly enraged and grinding his teeth in anger was engrossed in thinking. He commanded his son Indrajith to go to battle.'

'Ravana, who was always victorious in warhearing that Maka raksha had been killed, became highly enraged and grinding his teeth in anger was engrossed in thinking. He commanded his son Indrajith to go to battle.'

'"Oh, Valiant son! You destroy the two heroic brothers, Rama and Lakshmana, by being visible or invisible as you are always superior to them."'

'"You have won the battle with Indra of incomparable deeds. Why not kill men, onseeing them in combat?"'

'Hearing the words spoken by the Lord of Rakshasas, Indrajith respecting the command poured oblations in the fireas per tradition before proceeding.'

'Thereafter, as he went to the place of fire sacrifice, Rakshasa women brought red coloured head dresses to wear (for the priests).'

'Then, in that fire sacrifice, weapons as grass, wooden pieces as sticks for offering into fire, redcoloured clothes for the priests to wear, and so also iron containers as ladles to offer in fire were used.'

"Weapons were spread on all sides of the fire sacrifice like grass. A darkcoloured live goat's neck was consigned for offering into fire."

'By that action of fire sacrifice, the mighty flames and the smoke that appeared from the mighty smokeless fire signifying victory appeared.'

'The flames of fire going round the fire by itself which closely resembled refined gold, received the offerings into fire.'

'Having offered fire that way, and gratified Devas, Danavas and Rakshasas, he (Indrajith) ascended the best of chariots and disappeared.'

'Drawn by horses, fitted with sharp mighty bows, the chariot was shining exquisitely and looked charming.'

'The chariot was glittering incarnated with gold covered with images offull moon, crescent moon inscriptions and decorated with images of antelopes.'

'Like flaming fire in appearance, the chariot was provided with rings of gold, the standard of the chariot was adorned with gems of Vydurya.'

'Protected by the weapon of Brahma, effulgent as the orbit of the Sun, the son of Ravana was endowed with mighty prowess and was difficult to gain over.'

'Indrajith who had acquired the power of being victorious in the wars departed, after uttering ritualistic verses which are known to Rakshasas only and making an offering into fire disappeared and bragged as follows.'

'"Having put an end to war, and the two princes who are in exile in the forest in vain, I will present the victory earned to my father now."'

"'Making the earth devoid of monkeys, killing Rama and Lakshmana, I will provide supreme joy to my father now', saying so he became invisible."

'Directed by the ten headed Ravana, enemy of Indra, equipped with sharp bows Indrajith rushed furiously.'

'That great hero saw Rama and Lakshmana like three serpents in the midst of Vanaras raining network of arrows.'

'Recognising the two princes, stringing his bow, and fastening, affixing he showered a continuous flow of arrows like rain from rain clouds and covered them.'

'Riding in the aerial car, Indrajith remaining out of sight released pointed arrows from the sky and tormented Rama and Lakshmana standing in the battlefield.'

'Covered by the speed of the arrows released on them, both Rama and Lakshmana wielding their bows and arrows discharged wonderful arrows and exhibited their power.'

'Though the mighty Rama and Lakshmana were covering the sky with their arrows resembling the sun they could not touch Indrajith.'

'The glorious Indrajith obscured the sky by making it dark through smoke and fog and made the surrounding directions invisible.'

'While Indrajith was moving, neither the sounds produced by palms or of the wheels or the hoof s were heard and the form was also not visible.,'

'The mighty armed Indrajith showered rocks and hails of steel arrows in that pitch darkness like the darkness of clouds.'

"In that conflict, the enraged son of Ravana, pierced all over Rama's limbs, with arrows bestowed to him, which were as effulgent as the Sun."

'The tigers among humans, Rama, and Lakshmana, like two mountains hit by steel arrows, released sharp pointedgold shafted steel arrows and tormented (Indrajith).'

"The arrows fixed with swords like wings, reaching Ravana's son in the sky pierced him and he fell down soaked in blood."

'Brightened by the mass of arrows on their body, the best of men, Rama and Lakshmana began to tear the numerous arrows called Bhallas.'

'Both the sons of Dasharatha, directed their best weapons in the direction from where arrows were falling on two of them.'

'The son of Ravana who was a superior chariot warrior and swift in discharging arrows coursed through all directions and pierced arrows at Rama and Lakshmana from the aerial car.'

'Both the sons of Dasharatha looked like fully blossomed Kimsuka trees (blood flowing from the body) pierced by wellmade gold shafted arrows.'

'When the clouds are cast thickly, except the position of the Sun, nothing is visible. So also, with a swift movement of Indrajith, neither his form nor his bow and arrows were visible.'

'Then, monkeys struck and killed, lifelessin hundreds fell on the ground.'

'Then Lakshmana also, enraged, spoke to his brother, saying," I will kill all the Rakshasas using the weapon of Brahma."'

'To Lakshmana, gifted with auspicious signs, Rama said" for the sake of killing one Rakshasa, you are not to kill all the Rakshasas on the earth."'

'"You should not kill anyone who is not waging war, not fighting and hidden, one with folded palms surrendered, one who runs away from war and not alert in war"'

'"O mighty armed Lakshmana! I will make an effort to kill Indrajith by commanding weapons like venomous serpents endowed with high speed."'

'" A conjurer, mean, and invisible Indrajith with the chariot, if seen, in any way the Vanara troops will forcibly kill him with their strength."'

'"If he enters into earth, heaven or the underground world or the subterranean world or remains hidden, my weapon will consume him, and he will fall on earth."'

"Knowing the highsouled Raghava's mind, Indrajith departed from there and entered the city."

"Recollecting those Rakshasas killed, the heroic, mighty and courageous Indrajith's eyes were red in anger."

'Paulastya (one of the nine mind born sons of Brahma, a scion of sage Paulastya), stupendous hero, a tormentor of Devatas, Indrajith, surrounded by Rakshasas came out through the western gate.'

'Indrajith, also witnessing the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana prepared for war, exhibited his trickery.'

'Indrajith, also through a trick, wanted to make illusory Sita and place her in the chariot surrounded by Rakshasas and thought of killing her.'

'Evil minded Indrajith, made up his mind to hoodwink every one who decided to kill Sita and went towards the Vanaras.'

'All the forest animals perceiving Indrajithadvancing became angry and with rocks in hand faced him with enthusiasm.'

'Hanuman, the elephant among monkeys, taking hold of a huge mountain peak that was difficult to reach marched forward and went.'

'Hanuman beheld in the chariot of Indrajith, cheerless Sita with one braid, with no desire to live, emaciated by fasting, wearing a single cloth, body not anointed, covered with dust and dirt all over the body, who was dear to Raghava.'

"He looked at her for a moment and recognised her as Janaka's daughter since he had seen her not long before."

'Great Vanara, Hanuman, gazing at miserable, joyless, ascetic woman seated in the chariot, worried, why she is in the chariot. He spoke to the best of Vanara leaders and rushed towards the son of Ravana with them.'

"Indrajith saw the Vanara army coming towards him, deluded with anger, unsheathed the sword and touched Sita's forehead."

"As they were looking at Sita on the chariot trickishly constructed, and she was crying saying, 'O Rama, O Rama', he stood and hit her."

"Seeing Indrajith holding Sita's head, Maruti's son, was immersed in grief, and shed tears of sorrow from his eyes."

"Looking at Rama's dear wife, of lovely limbs, Hanuman rebuked Indrajith in anger and spoke harsh words."

'"O evil minded Indrajith! You are born as Rakshasa in the clan of seers of vedic mantras and sought the womb of Rakshasa woman. It is for your own self destruction you seized her hair.'

'"You are ignoble, mean, of sinful prowess, not merciful. You have resolved to take such a sinful action which is not worthy of you. You have no compassion to act in this manner."'

'"This Mythili is sent away from home, from the kingdom, and also distanced from Rama\'s protection. You are unkind and hitting in this way. What harm has she done?"'

'"Indeed, you will not live long after killing Sita. You deserve to be killed for your actions, that is why you have come into my hands."'

'"You deserve to be killed by the world here. Giving up your life, you will be thrown out and descend to the world with those who killed women have gone, after your death."'

'Hanuman was highly enraged and speaking like got prepared for war and went surrounded by the monkeys towards Indrajith, the son of Rakshasa king.'

'Rakshasa army troops of mighty prowess, terribly angry, were advancing towards wood dwellers (Vanara troops) and were intercepted by the Vanara troops.'

'Indrajith shattered the army of monkeys with a thousand arrows. Hanuman the foremost Vanara replied to them as follows.'

'"I will kill your Vaidehi today as you keep seeing her for whose sake Sugriva, you and Rama also came here," said Indrajith.'

'"O Vanara! This day, having killed her, I will kill Rama, Lakshmana, and you, also Sugriva and that ignoble Vibheeshana."'

'"O Hanuman! You said women should not be killed. But whoever causes trouble to the enemy, action should be taken, said Indrajith."'

'Indrajith having spoken like that killed that crying illusory Sita with a sharpedged sword.'

'Split diagonally, the ascetic woman with charming hips and pleasing countenance sank into the ground.'

'Indrajith killed that woman and said to Hanuman" see this Vaidehi, Rama\'s wife, cut up by my sword. Your exertion is useless now."'

'Indrajith himself with his long sword killed her, then rejoiced, he ascended the chariot and roared in a loud tone.'

'The sound of his roar was heard by the Vanaras waiting for war standing not far from there, which was difficult for Indrajith to access.'

'The bulls among Vanaras heard the roar which was like thunder and looking at Indrajith fled in all directions.'

"Thereafter, Maruti's son, Hanuman said to all Vanaras who were looking sad, piteous, feeling singly out of fear, and running away."

'"O monkeys! Why have you lost enthusiasm to fight, looking sad and running away? Where has your valour gone?"'

'"Return and come in front, close to me and follow me. It is not proper for you to win wars and be praised."'

'Wise son of wind god having spoken in that way, delighted in mind the Vanaras seized peaks of mountains and also trees in great fury.'

'Surrounding Hanuman, the Vanara leaders followed him for a great fight.'

'Hanuman went surrounded by Vanara leaders who resembled flaming fire and began to consume the enemy troops like flaming fire.'

'The Vanara army surrounded that great monkey, Hanuman, who was like Yama, the god of death and caused havoc to Rakshasas.'

"Hanuman, overtaken by anger, filled with great sorrow hurled a huge rock at the chariot of Ravana's son."

'Then seeing that rock coming towards the chariot yoked to obedient horses, the chariot rider drove it to a long distance.'

'That rock hurled by Hanuman failed to reach the chariot in which Indrajith was seated and also the charioteer. It cleaved the earth and entered.'

'As the rock fell on the battlefield the Rakshasa troops got alarmed and were violently crushed to death.'

'Those gigantic forest dwellers in hundreds seizing trees and rocks lifted and fought making loud noise.'

'Courageous Vanaras, innumerable in number began to rain trees and rocks throwing on the enemies. The Rakshasas number rolled on the battlefield shouting in numerous tones.'

'Night rangers of dreadful appearance beaten up with trees by most fierce Vanaras, fell on the battlefield and struck one another.'

"Indrajith, looking at his own army tormented by the Vanaras, was enraged, and went towards the enemies' seizing weapons."

'Indrajith of unyielding valour, combining with his own army let go numerous arrows on the tigers of Vanaras and struck them.'

'In the battle, followers of Indrajith struck the Vanaras with tridents, asanis, swords, sharp edged spears, and kutamudgaras.'

'Hanuman, who was endowed with great strength, killed Rakshasas capable of terrific tasks with trees having large trunks and branches and stones also.'

'Hanuman made the enemy army retreat, and spoke to his own army," No use of defeating this army for us as our mission is not winning the army."'

'"To please Rama, we are giving up life. Let us make Rama know that the daughter of Janaka for whose sake we are fighting this war and giving up life has been killed."'

'"On telling this fact (that Indrajith has killed Sita) to Rama and Sugriva and knowing their reply we will do what is to be done."'

'The foremost of the Vanaras, kept back all the Vanaras after speaking that way to the army and slowly and slowly retreated.'

'Thereafter, observing Hanuman going to Raghava, the evil minded Indrajith went to Nikumbhilam desiring to offer oblations at the sanctuary.'

'Indrajith reaching Nikumbhilam, the sacrificial ground, poured oblation of blood into the sacrificial fire for Devatas and the fire blazed.'

'The flame had swollen up with the offering of blood as oblation and risen. It was very bright and wrapped in the flames the fire resembled the sun.'

'Hearing the great noise of war between Rakshasas and Vanaras, Rama said to Jambavantha.'

'"O gentle Jambavan! The terrifying sound of weapons is heard. Surely Hanuman has done a difficult task."'

'"O King of Bears! Accompanied by your army, go to the battlefield and help the best of monkeys."'

'Rama having spoken thus, King of Bears surrounded by Vanaras went to Hanuman at the western gate.'

'Then the Lord of Bears saw Hanuman accompanied by Vanaras who fought in war coming sighing.'

'Hanuman seeing the terrific army of Bears marching like a dark cloud asked them to return and he also returned with them.'

'Hanuman of great fame accompanied by army quickly came to Rama and submitted as follows.'

'"Ravana\'s son, Indrajith struck Sita, who was crying in front of us looking at us while we were fighting in war."'

'"O Tamer of enemies! Seeing her (Sita) bewildered in mind, worried, I have come to inform you accompanied by Vanaras."'

"On hearing, Hanuman's words Raghava became deluded in sorrow and fell on the ground like a tree cut at the root."

'Seeing Raghava who is equal to god fallen on the ground, and the best of monkeys lifting him, the Vanaras from all over came jumping.'

'Reaching Rama, who was like a burning fire that has risen up and suddenly fallen, the Vanaras sprinkled water with fragrance of lotuses and lilies on Rama just as sprinkling water on an inextinguishable fire that has flared up suddenly.'

'Then, Lakshmana who was very worried held the arms of Rama who was unwell and spoke these meaningful words.'

'"O Noble Rama! If You, who have gained over senses and sticking to a virtuous path are not protected, from this calamity by righteousness, then righteousness is useless."'

'" As animate and inanimate beings are seen experiencing joy at present, righteousness is not the cause of joy, I think so."'

'"Just as inanimate beings which are seen happy and animate are also seen in the same manner, in which case that righteousness alone prospers is not there (for a person like you would not suffer). Knowing this you should not suffer."'

'"If there is unrighteousness, Ravana should be in hell. You who are endowed with righteousness should not have agony."'

'" As Ravana has no sorrow and you have experienced agony the contraries of each other have changed the roles of righteousness and unrighteousness."'

'"The righteous attains the benefit through righteous means, and the unrighteous suffer by unrighteous means. If unrighteousness is rooted in the unrighteous and are pleased with unrighteousness they will be deprived of the result of righteousness. It is not otherwise."'

'"Since those rooted in unrighteous develop and are wealthy, and those who follow dharma suffer both these are meaningless."'

'"Righteousness and unrighteousness are forms of actions, sinful or not sinful. If sinful action is unrighteous, those who have done sinful actions should suffer. Since sinful action is momentary, and as soon as the action is over unrighteousness is also gone. That being so how can unrighteousness cause pain to anyone?"'

'"Or else if a man is destroyed by killing another, destiny which is engendered by the sinful action suffers and not the doer of sinful action."'

'"O Crusher of enemies! How does righteousness get encountered? It is not seen. How to know whether it is real or unreal? Is it possible to know that the best result is attained by righteousness."'

'"O foremost among the victorious! To you, who are a jewel no evil should accrue. Since such difficulty has been faced by you, the fact that good actions result in good destiny is not true."'

'"Or else dharma becomes feeble, ineffective, submits to might, then it is better not to follow such dharma which is feeble, I think."'

'"Giving up predominance of virtue, seek courage and submit to might for succeeding in action. Seek might just as you have sought dharma earlier for success."'

'"O scorcher of enemies! If you consider speaking the truth is dharma, why did you not bind your father (who promised to give the kingdom) and was not compassionate (spoke untruth later)."'

'"Indra killed an ascetic (Viswarupa) and did fire sacrifice. If dharma alone is his duty, he could have done hundreds of fire sacrifices and not have killed the ascetic. If adharma is duty he would have killed the ascetic and not done fire sacrifice."'

'"Kakuthsa Rama! Kings followed dharma and adharma both according to context. Whether following dharma or adharma destruction is happening. Therefore, humans keep doing both as per their desire."'

'"Dear Raghava! In my opinion also depending on desire and context, following dharma or adharma is proper. You have severed the roots of dharma by giving up the kingdom."'

'"Prosperity is augmented gradually and developed by all means just as rivers flow from mountains, all undertakings follow conducive to success."'

'"Just like streams dry up in summer, if one who is of meagre intelligence and forsakes wealth, all his actions will be interrupted."'

'"If one who has been happy seeks happiness on renouncing wealth then proceeds to perform sinful actions it is a mistake."'

'"Friends gather round him in whom riches abide. Relations stand by him who has wealth. He is considered manly in whom wealth abides, and he is learned who has wealth."'

'He is gallant to whom wealth has flown, he is intelligent in whom wealth abides, he is glorious in whom wealth exists and he is superior in great virtues in whom wealth found receptacle.'

"'If you give up wealth the evils will follow you', said I. Now you left the kingdom. The basis on which you made such a resolve is not known to me."

"For one who has wealth all his actions of dharma would give pleasure and favourable. One who has no wealth and is worrying about it can't attain it."

'"O Rama! Desire, delight, pride, virtue, anger, forgiveness, fortitude all these are effective through wealth."'

'"Even if there is wealth if one renunciates wealth and follows dharma in this world they perish like planets on cloudy days."'

'"O heroic Rama! You have been faithful to the promise to your father and left home following dharma (giving up wealth), and your dear wife who is your life has been abducted by Rakshasa."'

'"Get up, heroic Raghava! I will get rid of the agony caused to you by Indrajith, by the action."'

'"O tiger among men! O broad shouldered endowed with fortitude! Why do you not know yourself that you are a great soul and doer of action?"'

'As Lakshmana was comforting his affectionate brother, Vibheeshana came to Rama assigning the troops to reach their respective places.'

'Accompanied by the four ministers surrounded by four ministers resembling leaders of elephants, who looked dark like collyrium, Vibheeshana came to highsouled Rama. He witnessed Vanaras whose eyes were filled with tears.'

'He (Vibheeshana) saw the great soul, the delight of the Ikshvaku race deluded, distressed, and lying on the lap of Lakshmana.'

'Vibheeshana was pained to see Rama immersed in grief, depressed in spirit, and asked for What is all this grief for?'

"Lakshmana looking at Sugriva's face and also at the Vanaras, his eyes bathed in tears spoke in a dull tone."

'"O Noble one! On hearing Hanuman that Sita is killed by Indrajith, Rama is deluded\', said Lakshmana to Vibheeshana."'

'Vibheeshana spoke these meaningful words to Rama, who was unconscious, restraining Saumithri from speaking.'

'"I think that what has been spoken by Hanuman as truth (that Sita has been killed) is like drying up an ocean."'

'"O mighty armed Rama! with reference to Sita, you do not know Ravana\'s opinion. He will never kill Sita."'

'"Though I pleaded Ravana to return Vaidehi for his welfare, he did not accept my word."'

'"She can\'t be perceived by recourse, by charity, by dissension or even by war. Why again any other means. There is no chance."'

'That Rakshasa by hoodwinking the Vanaras withdrew from the battlefield. O mighty armed one! Killing of Janaki is an illusion.'

'"Ravana\'s son will be reaching a sanctuary named Nikumbhilam and doing a sacrificial ritual. On returning from there it will be difficult even for Indra and Devas to be at him in war. He has done this conjuring trick.'

'"Knowing the prowess of Vanaras, thinking surely that they will create obstacles for the ritual, he used the trick to keep them away (to be sad and not inclined for war)."'

'"O tiger among men! We shall go there with the army before the completion of the sacrificial ritual. Give up false agony and the cause of sorrow. Seeing you all the troops are distressed."'

'"You be confident at heart and be courageous now. Send Lakshmana with us with the army."'

'"The tiger among mortals with his sharp arrows will dispel Ravana\'s son from doing the action (sacrifice) then killing him will be possible.'

'"Those whetted and pointed arrows fixed with limbs of birds in the form of feathers will drink his (Indrajith\'s) blood like cruel birds."'

'"O mighty armed Rama! send Lakshmana endowed with auspicious qualities for the destruction of Rakshasa like Indra with thunderbolt", conveyed Vibheeshana.'

'"O Jewel among men, wasting time in case of destruction of the enemy is not desirable. Just like the Lord of gods sent to kill the enemy of gods, you command Lakshmana to kill the enemy."'

'Immersed in grief, Raghava could not make out the words spoken by Vibheeshana.'

'Then Rama, who can win over enemies, picked up courage, said to Vibheeshana seated near him in front of Vanaras.'

'"O Lord of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana! I wish to hear the words spoken by you. You may repeat that which you wanted to convey. I wish to hear."'

"Vibheeshana, who was skilled in expression, spoke again as follows on hearing Raghava's words."

'" After your command the army has been divided and placed at respective places as you said."'

'All the army forces have been collected, divided, and assigned to respective places separately.'

'"O great Lord! Hear me, which is yet to be submitted by me to you. You are afflicted without cause and pained at heart."'

'"O king! Give up this false agony which has set in. It enhances the joy of the enemy. Give up this anxiety."'

'"Let efforts be made to recover Sita. Let enthusiasm be restored to recover Sita. Rakshasas will be exterminated."'

'"Delight of Raghus! You may listen to my words of advice. Let Saumithri march ahead to Nikumbhilam accompanied by the great army. On reaching, let Lakshmana who is capable of killing Indrajith discharge venomous serpents like deadly poisonous arrows from his bow in circular form and kill Rakshasas."'

'"Lakshmana, being heroic received Brahmasira weapon from the creator by austerity and also horses which can course according to his will."'

'"Indrajith has reached Nikumbhilam accompanied by the army. If he completes the sacrifice and comes from there after completion of the sacrifice, know that we are all killed.'

'"O mighty armed Rama! that enemy of yours, while you have not reached Nikumbhilam and not propitiated fire sacrifice, can cause your death. Such a boon was granted to him, the enemy of Indra by the Lord of all worlds."'

'Rama, you are endowed with extraordinary prowess! Order now for the destruction of Indrajith as with his death Ravana and all his kinsfolk are killed, you may know.'

'Hearing Vibheeshana, Rama said" the conjuring skills of Indrajith of truthful valour is known to me."'

"He is skilled in the use of Brahma's weapon, intelligent in conjuring, endowed with mighty prowess, and can make even varuna and Devatas unconscious."

'When he moves in his chariot in the sky like the Sun coursing through clouds is difficult to know.'

'Knowing the wickedminded enemy of conjuring valour, Rama spoke as follows to Lakshmana, richly endowed with fame (of winning wars).'

'"O Lakshmana! Surrounded by the entire army of Vanara king, with Hanuman as commander in chief of the army, protected by Jambavan, king of Bears, put an end to the son of Ravana who is well versed in tricks."'

'"This great soul, night ranger (Vibheeshana) who knows his conjuring tricks well, will follow behind you with ministers."'

'"On hearing Raghava\'s words, Lakshmana of wonderful courage took up the best of bows accompanied by Vbheeshana."'

"Saumithri fully equipped with shields, swords, shafts, and golden bow joyfully, touched Rama's feet with reverence and spoke."

"Now the arrows released from my bow will drop in Lanka, just as swans descend into lotus pond and pierce into Ravana's son."

'"Today loosed from my mighty bow, the arrows will split his fierce body and kill him."'

"Brilliant Lakshmana, having spoken that way in front of his brother, went speedily desirous of killing Ravana's son."

'Saluting the feet of the eldest brother and going round him, Laksmana proceeded to Nikumbhila sanctuary ruled by Ravana.'

'Lakshmana, a valourous prince having received blessings from his eldest brother, went quickly accompanied by Vibheeshana.'

'Then Hanuman surrounded by many thousands of Vanaras, Vibheeshana and ministers followed Lakshmana.'

'Lakshmana also saw Jambavan standing on the way, with a huge Vanara army surrounded while going speedily.'

'Lakshmana, the delight of friends, witnessed from a distance the Rakshasa army arranged in battlearray.'

'The tamer of enemies and delight of the Raghu race, Lakshmana stood wielding bow in hand ready to win the conjurer conferred with boon by the creator Brahma.'

'Accompanied by Vibheeshana, and also hero Angada, so also the son of fire god, Hanuman, Lakshmana stood together.'

"Ravana's brother seeing Lakshmana spoke these words of advice to accomplish the task and which is not good for the enemies."

'"The army of Rakshasas looks like a dark cloud and let the monkeys too get engaged to fight swiftly with trees as weapons."'

'"O Lakshmana! Shatter this mighty army of Rakshasas. When it is broken Ravana\'s son will become visible."'

'"You have come to attack the enemy. Before he completes his action quickly attack him with the thunderbolt of Indra."'

'"Hero, wicked minded, conjurer, unrighteous and cruel one who is a terror for all worlds is Ravana\'s son. Destroy him."'

"Lakshmana, who had auspicious marks, on hearing Vibheeshana rained showers of arrows on Ravana's son."

'The Bears and monkeys together initiated a fight with the army with trees, mountains, and nails as weapons.'

'The Rakshasas also launched attacks in the battle with sharp swords, javelins, and lances.'

'With both the monkeys and Rakshasas mutually striking intensely, the mighty sounds resounded all over Lanka'

'The sky was covered with weapons of various shapes, arrows, trees, mountain peaks thrown at each other and were dreadful.'

'The Rakshasas with disfigured faces and arms, attacked the Vanaras, and their bodies pierced with weapons created great fear in them.'

'The monkeys likewise wounded and assailed the bulls among Rakshasas with trees and mountain peaks in the battle.'

'Mighty Bears and Vanaras of huge body, fighting in the battle caused great fear in Rakshasas.'

'Indrajith, who is difficult to overpower, on hearing the cries of his own army in agony got up without completing the task (of ritual).'

'Enraged, Indrajith coming out of the darkness of trees ascended the chariot already yoked and fixed firmly.'

'Indrajith, armed with a terrific bow and arrows, his body shining like a rainy cloud, with red eyes, angry face, seemed like the spirit of death.'

'Seeing Lakshmana prepared for war, the Rakshasa army endowed with speed surrounded him.'

'In the meantime, Hanuman, who resembled a mountain, a tamer of enemies, who is difficult to overpower, taking up huge trees fighting with Rakshasas created havoc like fire at the time of dissolution and went about.'

"Seeing the wind god's son destroying, thousands of Rakshasas got together surrounding him."

'Between the skilful Rakshasas armed with sharp tridents, swords, javelins in hand, with spears in hand, bright iron bars glowing like fire, with iron axes, dreadful hammers, Bhindi palas and Hanuman, with thunderbolt like fists that descended like lightning, and slaps which descended like mountains, a huge skillful war took place.'

'Indrajith witnessed Hanuman, the foremost of Vanaras without weapons, fearlessly fighting.'

'Thus Indrajith spoke to the charioteer "This Vanara will no doubt reduce the Rakshasa army if we keep waiting."'

'On hearing Indrajith who is highly difficult to encounter speaking in that way his charioteer drove Indrajith, to that place, where Maruthi was.'

'Going near Hanuman, that dreadful Rakshasa, rained arrows, spears, swords and iron bars on the face of Hanuman.'

'Receiving those frightening weapons, Maruthi spoke these words overcome by anger.'

'"Evil minded hero! Fight with me back having met, you shall not return alive."'

'"Fight with me for a duel war if you like. Come quickly and with stand, then you will become foremost among Rakshasas.'

'"Vibheeshana told Lakshmana that Indarjith having seated is ready to attack Hanuman."'

'"Ravana\'s son, the conqueror of Indra, having taken a se at in the chariot seeks to kill Hanuman."'

'"O Saumithri! Kill that son of Ravana with your formidable weapons of incomparable craftsmanship, dreadful arrows capable of killing enemies."'

'Vibheeshana, having spoken that way, Saumithri was satisfied. Wielding a bow Saumithri went quickly with Vibheeshana.'

'Thereafter Vibheeshana followed Lakshmana for a small distance to the forest and showed him What to do.'

'Vibheeshana, the brilliant brother of Ravana, showed Lakshmana a banyan tree resembling a dark cloud, frightening to look at.'

'"Mighty son of Ravana having offered oblations for all beings he comes to the battlefield. (Said Vibheeshana)"'

'"Thereafter he becomes invisible for all beings and kills his enemies with the best of arrows and binds them."'

'"Before he enters the banyan tree, you destroy Indrajith, with his chariot, horses and charioteer by the flaming arrows"'

'Brilliant Saumithri, delighted by his friends, twanging his wonderful bow stood there, after Vibheeshana had spoken to him.'

'Indrajith, who was endowed with mighty prowess, armed with shield and sword, appeared like glowing gold in the chariot decorated with a post.'

'Lakshmana of extraordinary energy, spoke to Indrajith of the Paulastya clan," I challenge you to fight in battle directly. Fight with me."'

'Having spoken that way, highly energetic and strong minded Indrajith seeing Vibheeshana spoke to him harshly as follows.'

'"O Rakshasa! You are born here and brought up by my father. You are my father\'sbrother also. How can you be hostile to your son?"'

'"Evil minded Vibheeshana! You are vitiating righteousness, have no value to your race, no affection to your clan, no brotherly feeling and have no righteousness."'

'"You are evil minded, think. You are pitiable and to be blamed for you have abandoned your own people and sought the enemy\'s protection."'

'"You do not seem to have an understanding of the difference between living with one\'s own people and seeking refuge from strangers. Your intellect has slackened you are not knowing."'

'"Even if others are virtuous and your own people are not virtuous also one should seek the refuge of one\'s own people. Strangers are always strangers."'

'"He who renounces his own kind and seeks refuge from others, will be destroyed by others whose refuge he sought when his own people are destroyed."'

'"O Ravana\'s brother! You have shown ruthlessness this way. O night ranger! Only you could exhibit this kind of manliness."'

'Indrajith having spoken like that, Vibheeshana replied," why do you speak like that as though you do not know my disposition?"'

'"Impious son of Rakshasa king! Though born in the Rakshasa clan I renounced cruel deeds and followed respectfully manliness as my primary quality. My nature is not like that of Rakshasas."'

'"I do not delight in cruel deeds, nor follow unrighteousness. Or else because of unfavourable disposition how can a brother be expelled by a brother?"'

'"The association of one who has renounced righteousness and is of sinful deeds is left by a righteous man who undoubtedly attains happiness, is like shaking of a venomous serpent from the hand."'

'"Seizing the property of others, uniting with others wife, evil mindedness is said to be given up like getting out of a burning house."'

'"Stealing the wealth of others, possessing others wife, distrusting friends, these three faults will destroy a person."'

'"Dreadful killing of sages, haughtiness towards deities, irascibility, anger, animosity, refractorinessall these faults will put an end to one\'s life. These faults have obscured my brother\'s future just as rainy clouds veil the mountain."'

'"Because of these faults your father and my brother has been abandoned by me from this Lanka. This Lanka will not be there, nor your father and you too."'

'"O Rakshasa! You are mean, proud of might, immoral and bound by the noose of death. Whatever you wish to say you may say."'

'"O Lowly Rakshasa! This worry has come to you today. Entering the banyan tree is not possible for you today."'

'"Clashing with Lakshmana of Kakuthsa clan is not possible for you. By waging war with Lakshmana, you will be killed and reaching the abode of the Lord of death. You will be doing tasks of deities of Devatas."'

"Hearing Vibheeshana's words, Indrajith was deluded with fury, spoke harshly and advanced."

'Lifting his long, strong huge, great terrific bow endowed with high speed and holding it drawing arrows seated in a chariot well decorated, drawn by black horses, Indrajith looked like God of Death.'

"Wielding a bow, seated in a well decorated chariot, mighty destroyer of enemies (Indrajith) saw Raghava's brother."

'Lakshmana was like the Sun on the eastern mountain mounted on the back of Hanuman, the tiger among Vanaras. He saw Vibheeshana and spoke.'

'"See my valour and prowess now. I will release shower of arrows from the sky like rain and it will be difficult for others to counter."'

'"Then my arrows delivered from the great bow will pierce the limbs and burn like a bundle of cotton by fire."'

'"Now I will send you to the abode of Yama with sharp arrows, tridents, pikes, spears and lances."'

'"Who can stand in front of me if I release rain of arrows with my swift hand in the battle roaring like a rain cloud?"'

'"Earlier in the war at night, by the thunderbolt like arrows released by me on the Earth, you and your accomplice were made unconscious and laid low."'

'"I am like a poisonous serpent, enraged. Is it that you have lost memory, or you stood here on the way to Yama\'s abode, I think."'

"On hearing Indrajith's words, Lakshmana spoke these words in anger with fearless countenance."

'"Rakshasa! You have proclaimed that you will send me to Yama\'s abode and about the success in your undertakings even though it is not possible. He who is intelligent will succeed in his tasks (not in words alone).'

'"O evil minded one! Your claim, in words that you have the capacity to do which is difficult for others is meaningless. Though you lack the capacity to succeed you are only thinking that you have succeeded."'

'"Remaining invisible and moving in the battle then is the path of a thief which is not chosen by warriors."'

'"Rakshasa! I have reached your range of arrows and stand before you. Show that power now about which you boasted."'

'After Lakshmana had spoken that way, Indrajith, endowed with mighty prowess, and victorious in combat seized a terrific bow and released pointed arrows.'

'The shafts like deadly poisonous serpents reached Lakshmana at great speed hissing and fell on Lakshmana.'

"Ravana's son Indrajith, who was endowed with great speed in war, pierced Lakshmana with shafts released at a much higher velocity."

'With shafts pierced all over, glorious Lakshmana was bathed in blood and shone like smokeless fire.'

'Indrajith observing his own action, approaching Lakshmana, emitted a loud cry and spoke these words.'

'"Saumithri, these sharp pointed arrows fixed to feathers, which can destroy life, released by me now will put an end to your life."'

'"Lakshmana! Today let the jackals, hawks and vultures descend on your bodystruck down by me and ceased of life fallen dead."'

'"Highly stupid Rama will see you, a devoted brother, a true kshatriya ever ignoble, killed by me today."'

'"Saumithri, he (Rama) will see you struck by me fallen on the ground, shield broken and fallen down, bow thrown down and trunk with severed head."'

'When Indrajith was speaking harshly, enraged Lakshmana replied in a meaningful way with reason.'

'"Evil minded Rakshasa! Give up that wasteful power of speech. You are cruel in action. What is the use of all this now? Show by good deeds and not by talk."'

'Rakshasa! What is the use of praising without performing action? Show by action and create trust that you can perform.'

'"Lowly Rakshasa! without any harsh words, indeed without boasting, commenting, interrupting I will assail you. You may see."'

'Having spoken like that, Lakshmana stretching his arrows till the ear fixed five sharp arrows of high speed on the chest of Rakshasa.'

'The arrows being tied to good feathers glowing like serpents shone on the chest of Rakshasa like the rays of Sun.'

'Struck by the arrows, Indrajith in return furiously released three well aimed arrows at Lakshmana.'

'In that combat both Lakshmana and Indrajith pounding to win against each other was frightening.'

'Both were richly endowed with prowess, both were courageous, exceedingly difficult to conquer and peerless in might.'

'In the combat both the heroes fought displaying their might, shone like two planets in the heaven and fought like Indra and Vrta and were difficult to overcome.'

'Then both the great warriors Lakshmana and Indrajith fought discharging many arrows, like lions among humans and Rakshasas respectively, looking out and seeking, dropping, and falling one over the other and stayed joyful.', '।। इत्यार्षेवामलीकीयेश्रीमद्रामायणेआदिकाव्येयुद्धकाण्डेअष्टाऽशीतितमस्सर्गः ।।', 'This is the end of the eighty eighth sarga of Yuddha Kanda of the first epic the holy Ramayana composed by sage Valmiki.'

'Then Lakshmana, the tamer of enemies, sighs in anger like a serpent, fixing his arrows discharged on Rakshasa king.'

'On hearing the sound of the bow string of Laksmana the Lord of Rakshasa became pale in face and looked at Lakshmana.'

"Seeing Ravana's son, pale faced, Vibheeshana replied as follows to Saumithri who was ready for combat."

'"On the basis of the indications of the pale face of Ravana\'s son, it is clear that he is broken at heart. No doubt about it."'

'Then Saumithri fitted his bow with shining arrows that were like tongues of fire, which resembled venomous serpents and discharged.'

"Struck by Indra's thunderbolt like arrows of Lakshmana, all sense organs of Indrajith remained excited for a short while."

'Heroic son of Ravana gained consciousness in a short while and returning to normalcy saw the heroic son of Dasharatha.'

'He (Indrajith), enraged and eyes turned red, advancing towards Lakshmana, and approaching him again spoke in this way harshly.'

'"Do you not remember that in the first combat your brother bound by me had fallen on the ground. Why do you not remember my valour?"'

'"Formerly in the course of the first battle, the great combat, you two were laid down on ground having lost senses struck by my thunderbolt like arrows and Asani of Indra."'

'"Knowing my valour, you have come. Have you lost memory or do you desire to go to Yama\'s abode? Tell me."'

'"If you have not seen my courage in the first combat, now I will exhibit. Stand and fight now."'

'Having spoken that way, Indrajith pierced Lakshmana with seven pointed shafts and Hanuman with ten best of shafts.'

'Then valiant Rakshasa, doubly angry pierced well targeted hundred arrows at Vibheeshana.'

'Then Lakshmana, the foremost among men, seeing Indrajith not minding his action even a little, laughing said," these arrows are not causing even a little pain." Then fearless Lakshmana discharged a dreadful arrow at Indrajith.'

'"O Night ranger! Heroes coming for war do not strike this way. These arrows are weak, so not painful but conducive."'

'"Heroes seeking victory in that way do not fight". Thus speaking, Lakshmana rained arrows.'

'Shattered by the arrows, the shield of Indrajith covered with gold dropped in the chariot like a mass of stars from the sky.'

"Indrajith's shield shattered by the iron arrows, (of Lakshmana) in the combat, he seemed (bathed in blood) like the morning Sun."

"Then enraged Ravana's son endowed with terrific valour pierced Lakshmana with a thousand arrows."

"Lakshmana's mighty and wonderful shield also got shattered. Both took offense as well as retaliated each other moving swiftly."

'Wounded all over the body in war and bathed in blood, breathing heavily again and again both of them fought vehemently.'

'Both heroes, being experts in fighting, tore each other with sharp arrows for long.'

'Both of them of terrible valour, each of them wanting to win, moving together their armour and standards torn, started emitting hot blood from their body like waterfalls gushing out.'

'Just as dark clouds rain from the sky at the time of dissolution, the dreadful rain of arrows set free from the bows of both Lakshmana and Indrajith caused terrific sound. Both of them fought for long and did not turn back from the battlefield or experienced any fatigue'

'Both of them, the best warriors, displaying their weapons again and again looking at the sky covered it with a network of arrows.'

'Both human and Rakshasa warriors fought an exceedingly frightening and dreadful fight over one another with agility without wasting a single arrow.'

'The fierce and tumultuous impact of the sound produced by their palms (clappings) could be heard separately. It was like a violent wind that had shaken.'

'When both of them were thus fighting, the exceedingly frightening sound that was heard was like the murmur of clouds.'

'Glorious and powerful heroes, determined to win over each other, wounded by the gold covered iron arrows were bleeding profusely.'

'In the battle the gold covered arrows fell on their body, dropped out and penetrated into the earth.'

'The other pointed arrows of both clashed with weapons in the sky in thousands, shattered and tore them.'

'In the battle the terrific arrows appeared to the eyes like kusa grass spread by the sacred fire.'

'The wounded bodies of the great heroes, shone like the Kimsuka and Cotton blossoms in the forest, swore off their leaves.'

'Indrajith and Lakshmana again and again carried out tumultuous and dreadful struggle.'

'In the battle Lakshmana and Indrajith striking each other had not experienced fatigue.'

'Great heroes, endowed with speed with a network of arrows pierced on the bodies shone like mountains overgrown with trees.'

'Both of them, bodies wet with blood and covered with arrows were glowing like fire and appeared bright.'

"Even though both, Ravana's son, and Lakshmana, fought for a long time they neither turned away from battle or experienced fatigue."

'Lakshmana (man) and Indrajith (Rakshasa) were fond of battle and intending to win in the fight overcoming each other. Each of them were like elephants but were broken into pieces. Vibheeshana, with eagerness to witness the battle stood in the forefront of the battlefield watching the fight.'

'Lakshmana (man) and Indrajith (Rakshasa) were fond of battle and intending to win in the fight overcoming each other. Each of them were like elephants but were broken into pieces. Vibheeshana, with eagerness to witness the battle stood in the forefront of the battlefield watching the fight.'

'Then Vibheeshana stood with stretched bow and loosened sharp pointed arrows on Rakshasas.'

'Those burning arrows falling on Rakshasas touched the Rakshasas and split them like thunderbolt splitting mountains.'

'Followers of Vibheeshana, the foremost of Rakshasa heroes, were shattered by the pikes, swords, and sharpedged spears in the battle.'

'Vibheeshana surrounded by Rakshasas shone like an elephant in the midst of young elephants.'

'Then Vibheeshana, who is a knower of what is the right time to act spoke to Vanaras to embolden them who were eager to fight with Rakshasas.'

'"Oh Vanara leaders! He (Indrajith) is the only one who is left in the Rakshasa army. Why do you stand idle?"'

'"If this wicked Rakshasa is struck down, except Ravana all his army is killed."'

'"The heroic Prahastha, Nikumbha also and Kumbhakarna of mighty prowess, Kumbha also, night ranger Dum raksha, Jambumali, Mahamali, Teekshanavega, Asanibhra, Suptanga, Yagnakopa, Vajradamshtra, Rakshasas Simhadri, Arigna, Vikata, Tapana, Dama also, Praghaasa, Praghasa, Prajaghna, and Jaghan also, Durdarsha, Agniketha, heroes Rasmikethu, Vidyajihva, Dwijihwa, Suryasatru, and Rakshasas Akampana, Suparswa, Chakramali, and Rakshasas Kampana, and energetic Devanthaka and Naranthaka have been killed by you."'

'"You have made short of many exceedingly mighty leaders of Rakshasas and swum the ocean. You cross this hoof mark of a cow without delay."'

'"O Vanaras! Left over Rakshasas only to be conquered now. Rakshasas, who were proud of their might have been killed on meeting you."'

'"For the sake of Rama, I will strike my brother\'s son. Being a father, taking pity, I am helpless as it is not proper for me to take the life of my son."'

'"I wish to kill him, tears are clouding my eyes. Mighty armed Lakshmana will kill him. Vanaras collected together are coming near him and can destroy his attendants."'

'Incited by the encouraging words of Vibheeshana (Rakshasa), Vanara chiefs rejoiced and went shaking their tails.'

'Then the tigers among monkeys again and again roaring in seeing the clouds made several kinds of sounds like peacocks.'

'All the troops surrounded by Jambavan too, pierced the Rakshasas with their nails and teeth.'

'The Rakshasas who were endowed with mighty strength giving up fear, armed with different kinds of weapons surrounded Jambavan, the Lord of Bears.'

'The Rakshasas then assailed Jambvan who was destroying the Rakshasa army with axes, pointed arrows, iron bars and sharpedged spears.'

'Fearful and vehement battle took place between enraged Vanaras and Rakshasas making loud clamours like the battle (in the past) between Devas and asuras.'

'Great selfHanuman too became furious and dismounting Lakshmana from his back uprooted a sala tree from a mountain and went on exterminating thousands of Rakshasas.'

"Mighty Indrajith who can give tough fight to enemies gave a violent fight to his father's brother and again rushed towards Lakshmana."

'In that battle the two heroes, Lakshmana and Indrajith rained streams of arrows on each other and engaged themselves in the battle.'

'Both the mighty and energetic heroes, covered each other with arrows just as after summer the moon and Sun are veiled frequently by clouds.'

'While both were fighting, due to the quickness of their hand movement, it could not be perceived whether they were taking out arrows from the quiver, drawing the string, or seizing arrows, or aiming to shoot or not. Whether they were drawing or stretching the bow or not or fixing with their fist or hitting the target or not, was not clear.'

'As they were discharging arrows from the bow swiftly, the arrows formed a net covering all over the sky and no object could be visible.'

'As Lakshmana was meeting Indrajith and Indrajith was reaching out to Lakshmana, confusion prevailed about who was hitting whom?'

'while both of them one over the other swiftly extended and loosened the whetted arrows continuously, the sky, shrouded with arrows, became dark.'

'Many hundreds of pointed arrows falling in all directions and intermediate points spread all over.'

'As the sun sank down, darkness enveloped, everything was dark and dreadful in appearance. Streams of blood of thousands flowed.'

'Carnivorous animals cried frightfully with their tongues. Wind did not blow, the fire did not glow.'

'Sages murmured saying" may this world be well." Gandharvas, Charanas (who came to see the battle) went distressed.'

'Then Saumithri pierced with four shafts all the four black horses decked in gold, of the lion of Rakshasas (Indrajith) and finished them'

"Then glorious Raghava with pointed bhalla furnished with beautiful plumes, splendid, deadly as Indra's thunderbolt, released and as it resounded the hit of the sword and severed the head from the body of the charioteer, who was driving in circles."

'When the charioteer got killed, the brilliant son of Mandodari, played the role of charioteer and wielded the bow again.'

'While Indrajith was engaged with the horses in one hand and battling, his capacity was a wonder to the onlookers. Lakshmana again attacked him loosening pointed arrows at him while Indrajith was busy with his bow.'

'While Indrajith was moving undaunted being hurt, Lakshmana who acts with extreme alacrity and fearless easily pierced Indrajith with arrows.'

"Seeing the charioteer killed, Ravana's son was despondent and lost enthusiasm to fight (said people)."

'The Vanara leaders were joyful upon seeing the worried face of the Rakshasa and acclaimed Lakshmana.'

'Then the four monkey leaders, Pramati, Rabahasa, Sarabha, and Gandamadhana exhibited their intolerance and went quickly.'

'The four Vanaras of remarkable valour and of terrific courage getting up immediately fell on the best of the horses (of Indrajith).'

'Those Vanaras of huge mountain forms getting on top of those horses (of Indrajith),'

'The horses were mutilated, broken, and sunk into the earth and killed. Again, bounding the great chariot, they got up quickly and stood nearby Lakshmana.'

'Charioteer dead, horses killed that Indrajith leapt down and assailed Lakshmana by raining arrows.'

'The nightranger, effulgent Indrajith standing on the ground very angry, with horses lost, was flaming with energy.'

'Exceedingly wanting to kill one another, wielding bows, both sallied forth like Lordly elephants in the forest, to succeed.'

'Moving all over, both Rakshasas and Vanaras killing one another in the battle did not leave their master.'

"Then Ravana's son, praising all the Rakshasas making them happy, spoke these words."

'" As all directions are spread with darkness now it is not possible to know who one\'s own is or others at this time."'

'"You delude the sight of Vanaras in battle. I will come to the battle taking the chariot."'

'"While I enter the city you must see that these wicked minded Vanaras do not prevent me from going."'

"Ravana's son, a slayer of his enemies, having spoken to Vanaras in that way, in deceiving manner entered Lanka to get the chariot."

"Ravana's son ascended a decorated chariot yoked to horses, directed by a charioteer who could tender good advice and a knower of the nature of horses. It was a beautiful chariot decked with darts and swords adorned with gold which Ravana's son of extraordinarily bright, who has won enemies, ascended."

'Heroic son of Mandodari, impelled by the force of destiny, departed from the city surrounded by Rakshasas.'

'Heroic in the act of destruction of enemies, Indarjith having started from the city in his chariot drawn by swift horses assailed Vibheeshana and Lakshmana.'

'Seeing Indrajith seated in the chariot, great hero Lakshmana as well as the Vanaras and Vibheeshana wondered how easily he went and returned.'

'Indrajith, highly enraged, struck Vanara leaders with a volley of hundreds and thousands of arrows.'

'Indrajith, a winner of combat, became highly furious and stretched his bow showing his skill easily struck at Vanaras.'

'(The Vanaras), though endowed with prowess and of terrific courage, struck by the Rakshasa, they sought refuge of Lakshmana, their Lord, just as people seek the refuge of their Lord, the creator.'

'There, in the battlefield the delight of Raghus glowing with anger shattered the Rakshasas showing the skill of his hand s.'

'Indrajith seizing another bow hastily targeted at Lakshmana and Lakshmana split them with three arrows.'

'Then Saumithri pierced with five arrows into the chest of Indrajith like a venomous serpent and split the bow.'

'Those arrows released from the great bow of Lakshmana, entered the body of Indrajithand fell on the ground like a huge red serpent.'

'Bow split, ejecting blood from mouth, Indrajith took his strong best of bows which had a stout string.'

'Indrajith, aiming at Lakshmana, let loose rain of arrows easily like rain.'

'Lakshmana, the tamer of enemies, without reacting intercepted the shower of arrows released by Indrajith which was difficult to resist.'

'Highly energetic Lakshmana, a delight of Raghus, unperturbed, demonstrated to Indrajith, which was a wonder indeed.'

'Then extremely angry Lakshmana pierced all the Rakshasas quickly, each one with three arrows and struck them and even the son of Rakshasa king, exhibiting his skills.'

'Indrajith, who was grievously wounded by his hostile enemy, Lakshmana, the destroyer of hostile enemies, continuously discharged arrows at him.'

'Heroic enemy, the righteous Lakshmana, tore the head of the carwarrior as well as the charioteer in the battle with bhala (spear), even before Indrajith discharged pointed arrows at him.'

'There, though there was no charioteer, the horses went round in circles and as they went forward it was wonderful.'

'Saumithri of untiring valour, overcome with fury in the battle, struck the horses to scare them and destroyed them.'

'Indrajith, unable to tolerate the action of Saumithri, was angry and struck him with ten arrows.'

"His arrows, which resembled thunderbolts and were like venomous serpents, touching Lakshmana's shield shining like gold, broken, and fallen"

"Ravana's son, knowing that it is not possible to break the shield of Lakshmana, quickly showed his weapon with three arrows with plumes and gems and struck him on the forehead."

'Lakshmana, the delight of Raghus, who loved to fight, looked charming in the battlefield with three arrows stuck on his forehead looking like three mountain peaks.'

'Then in the battle, pierced by Rakshasa in that manner, Laksmana immediately stretched his bow and struck with five arrows on the face of Indrajith, who was adorned with auspicious earrings.'

'Both heroes of extraordinary might and equipped with huge arms, endowed with terrific valour, Lakshmana and Indrajith struck one another with sharp arrows.'

'Then smeared with blood the two, Lakshmana and Indrajit, shone like fully blossomed Kimsuka in battle.'

'Both wishing for victory, set to tear each other, pierced dreadful arrows on one another all over the limbs, opposing.'

"Then Ravana's son in his charming countenance, filled with wrath because of conflict, struck at Vibheeshana with three arrows."

'Having struck Vibheeshana with three arrows, he struck again all the Vanara leaders with one arrow each.'

'Brilliant Vibheeshana struck evil minded Indrajith, his horses and elephants with his mace.'

'Highly energetic Indrajith, leaping down from the chariot, horses destroyed, now hurled a javelin at his uncle in the chariot.'

"Observing the javelin coming towards him, Lakshmana, the delight of Raghus and enhancer of Sumithra's joy, split it into ten pieces, which had fallen on the ground."

'Vibheeshana of strong body, pierced five arrows like thunderbolt in impact into the chest of Indrajith.'

'The arrows with red feathers of Vibheeshana having penetrated the body of Indrajith, piercing into the body they became red coloured seemed like a red serpent.'

'Indrajith, angry with his uncle, staying in the midst of Rakshasas, seized a mighty strong best arrow gifted by Yama.'

'Extraordinarily brilliant and of terrific valour, Lakshmana, perceiving the mighty shaft yoked by him (by Indrajith), he took up another arrow.'

'That arrow was gifted to Lakshmana in dream by Kubera, the god of wealth and even Suras or Asuras cannot resist it and is difficult to win.'

'Excellent bows of the two made noise like Krauncha birds while being drawn with great strength by the two, whose arms resembled iron bars.'

'The two best bows of both the heroes together, being powerful, shone with splendour when drawn with bowstring.'

'Those arrows released from the bows lit the sky when their heads collided with each other and glowed by rubbing against each other.'

'By the impact of the two arrows brought together, a formidable form of fire frightening with smoke and sparks was created.'

'In the battle both of them touching each other in conflict like the major planets flew into a hundred pieces and fell on earth.'

'Then both Lakshmana and Indrajith in the face of the battle seeing their arrows in nought with each other were abashed and got agitated.'

"Enraged Saumithri, seizing the weapon of Varuna, skilled in warfare loosened on Indrajith (Mahendra's enemy), which was presided over by Rudra."

"Then the very wonderful weapon of Varuna was made ineffective by the highly energetic Indrajith's who used glowing fire missiles as if to destroy the whole world."

"Then Lakshmana used a Sun missile and repelled (Indrajith's fire missile). Seeing his missile obstructed, Indrajith deluded with anger used a sharp Asura missile capable of destroying the enemy."

"By the Sun missile, the Kutamudgaras, tridents, Bhusundas, swords and axes issued forth from Indrajith's bow."

'Effulgent Lakshmana, seeing the terrible Asura missile and deliberating that it is capable of destroying all human beings and difficult to repel, used a Maheswara missile to divert.'

'The war between both was wonderful and horripulating. Beings from the sky saw Lakshmana diverting the Asura missile.'

'As the frightful war between Vanaras and Rakshasas went on, many beings surrounded in the sky were astonished and looked charming.'

'The Rsis, Devatas, manes, Gandharvas, Garudas, serpents and Indra who had performed hundred sacrifices, protected Lakshmana in war.'

"And thereafter, Raghava's brother fitted another excellent arrow which had the impact of the touch of fire capable of tearing Indrajith."

'The arrow with lovely feathers, consisting of beautiful parts, skilfully done, well jointed, decked with gold, was not only difficult to put off but also difficult to bear, was capable of destroying enemies, frightful, resembling venomous serpents, and worshipped by gods.'

'In the past at the war between Devas and Asuras, a mighty and energetic valiant Lord of Devas who had green horses conquered Danavas (with the same sword).'

"Son of Saumithri, that prosperous Lakshmana, drawing Indra's missile, the foremost one, and also the best of arrows, which has never been defeated, spoke these words set to achieve the purpose."

'"If Dasharatha\'s son, Sri Rama is righteous, truthful, of unrivalled valour and true to his promise this arrow will kill Indrajith."'

'Having spoken that way, Lakshmana, heroic in battle, bending the bow, stretching the arrow till the ear released on Indrajith.'

"Prosperous Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemies, aiming at Indrajith's head shining with earrings belonging to the head severed from the body, it fell on ground."

'Trunk broken off, the huge head of Indrajith bathed in blood was seen on the earth shining like gold.'

'Thereafter Indrajith with his shield, and helmet of the head broken was thrown on earth killed.'

'Then Vibheeshana and all the Vanaras rejoiced just as Devas, when Vrtasura was killed.'

'Then shouts of victory aroused from the heavens from the created beings of heaven, Rsis also, Gandharvas and Apsaras.'

'Great army of Rakshasas even though desired to win seeing (Indrajith dead), Vanaras started attacking them. Unable to bear Rakshasas screamed.'

'Those Rakshasas being killed by Vanaras, went running to Lanka leaving their weapons, with senses lost.'

'All Rakshasas feared and panic stricken fled in hundreds, in groups in all directions leaving their sharpedged spears, swords, and axes.'

'Pained by Vanaras, some fearful entered Lanka, few had fallen in the ocean and some sought refuge in the mountain.'

'Indrajith was lying, having fallen on the ground, and not even one of the thousands of Rakshasas was present there to see.'

'Just as Sun rays go away as soon as the Sun sets in the evening, the Rakshasas also went in all directions seeing Indrajith fallen.'

'Shorn of life, the broad shouldered Indrajith remained on the ground like the Sun whose rays have become cool, after death.'

"Then many were at peace and rejoiced in the world, being relieved, when Ravana's son dropped dead."

'Glorious Rakshasa of sinful deeds having been killed, all including great sages and Indra felt rejoiced.'

'In heaven also, sounds of drums of Gandharvas, great souls and dance of Apsaras were heard.'

'With cruel minded Rakshasa killed, celebrities showered rain of flowers praising the wonderful deed.'

'As the terror of all worlds had fallen and the water from the sky became pure, Devas and Danavas rejoiced and came there.'

'Devas, Danavas and Ghandharvas arrived there and said, "Let the Brahmins be without anxiety and move about without fear."'

'When, the best of Rakshasa, a leader of extraordinary prowess was killed, the Vanara army seeing Lakshmana felt happy and greeted him.'

'Vibheeshana and Hanuman, leader of Bears Jambavan praised Lakshmana and greeted him for his victory.'

'Having accomplished their goal, monkeys roaring, playing, surrounded Lakshmana, and stood.'

'Then Vanaras wagging their tails and lashing them announced slogans saying," Lakshmana is winning."'

'The monkeys feeling very happy embraced one another singing in praise of Lakshmana saying" Lakshmana has won"and stories related to Lakshmana'

'Body having auspicious marks, smeared with blood, Lakshmana experienced the joy of having won Indra in battle.'

'Then Valiant and mighty Lakshmana called Jambavantha, Hanumantha, all the Vanaras, following Vibheeshana and Hanuman quickly reached Sugriva and Raghava.'

"Thereafter Saumithri went close to Rama and offered prayers, like Indra's brother Upendra and stood close to his brother."

'Then heroic Lakshmana coming close to the great selfRaghava, in shaking tone (being tired) reported" Indrajith is killed."'

"Then Vibheeshana gladly informed Rama that Ravana's son's head had been severed by great Lakshmana."

'As soon as Lakshmana said that Indrajith was killed, Rama was very glad and immediately spoke as follows.'

'"Well done, Lakshmana! I am glad. A difficult deed has been done. By the fall of Indrajith success has been achieved."'

'Bending the head of Lakshmana, a valiant one and enhancer of glory, who was shy of praising him, Rama lovingly, forcibly drawing him onto his lap and making him sit on examined again and again the wounded body and looked at him.'

'Lakshmana, a bull among men, body tormented by arrows, immersed in pain, breathing heavily. Rama stroking him, restoring his confidence, quickly spoke as follows.'

'"You have done an extremely beneficial task which is difficult for others to do. I think Ravana is killed in the battle with your action of killing Indrajith."'

"'Ravana was depending on Indrajith indeed. Now by that a great action of severing his right hand in comb at by Vibheeshana and Hanuman, I consider victorious.'"

"'Hero! In three days and nights indeed, you have made short of Indrajith. Hearing that Ravana's son has been made short of, Ravana will come now with large army troops.'"

"'On hearing of his son's death, the Rakshasa Lord will come forth with a huge army. Turning towards him I will put an end to him.'"

"Lakshmana, with you as my protector and Indra's enemy killed, neither Sita nor earth will be difficult to get back."

'Rama, the celebrated scion of Raghu dynasty, restored the confidence of Lakshmana and embraced him happily. He invited Sushena and spoke as follows.'

'"O very wise Sushena! Treat Saumithri in such a way that this Lakshmana, loved by friends pained by the arrows pierced, will be relieved."'

'"Let Vibheeshana and Saumithri be treated quickly. Let all the army of Bears and others who fought with trees, and the heroes be treated. Let all others who fought in the battlefield and wounded be also healed by your effort and make them happy."'

'Spoken by Rama in that manner, the great Vanara leader, Sushena gave supreme medicine to Lakshman through his nose.'

'He then inhaled the fragrance and got freed from arrows, the pain of wounds and restored to normal state.'

"Then by Rama's order Vibheeshana and other friends and all Vanara leaders were healed."

'Then Saumithri, freed from arrows, relieved from pain, anguish gone in a moment, and naturally restored, was happy.'

'At that time, Rama, also the monkey leader, and Vibheeshana, Jambavan with their army seeing Lakshmana getting up, free from wounds were full of joy.'

'Then, having known about the distressing fall of Indrajith, the ministers of Ravana reported to the tenheaded Ravana.'

'"O King! Your glorious son was killed by Lakshmana with the assistance of Vibheeshana, as we were witnessing."'

'"Your son who has never been defeated in war, who won Indra, the ruler of gods, after fighting and fighting was killed by Lakshmana\'s arrows. He has ascended to the higher world."'

"On hearing about the enumeration of his son Indrajith's dreadful, frightening and ghastly end, Ravana gave way to swoon."

"Coming to senses after a long time, the Rakshasa king Ravana, dejected with sorrow of his son's death, lost senses, lamented."

"'My son who was a chief of the Rakshasa army, a mighty one, who has won even Indra, how has he become a victim of Lakshmana'?"

"'When angry, you could pierce with arrows even the time spirit or peak of Mandara mountain, why to speak of Lakshmana again'?"

"'O mighty armed! Today by virtue of time you have joined Yama and become esteemed King'."

"'Killed in war for the cause of the king and treading the path of noble warriors, one attains the heaven. Even for a human it is desirable'."

"'Today, seeing Indrajith killed, Devatas in heaven, guardians of the worlds, great sages would be fearless and be happy and comfortable'."

'Today without Indrajith alone the three worlds (earth, heaven, and underworld) including forests are desolate, dark, and lustreless to me.'

"'Today in the gynaecium we will hear the cries of Rakshasa maidens like the roaring of elephants in the cave'."

"'O Scourge of enemies! You have left giving up prince regent, Rakshasas, from Lanka, your mother, me, and your wife also. And went. Why'?"

"'O hero! My obsequies should have been done by you. It is peculiar that I have to perform'."

"'While Sugriva is living, Lakshmana and Raghava also, deserting me, you have gone. Where have you gone'?"

'Distressed Ravana was lamenting in this way on account of his son deserting, as anger had taken over him.'

'By nature, he is angry. Now with the loss of his son, he was glowing like the Sun that shines brighter by the rays in summer.'

"Ravana's eyebrows contracted on his forehead, he shone like the waves in the great ocean with crocodiles at the time of dissolution of the universe."

"As Ravana yawned in anger, fire with smoke burst forth from his mouth like Vrtra'."

'Pondering over the death of his asura son, Ravana was overtaken by fury, and reviwed thinking about the destruction of Vaidehi.'

"By nature, Ravana's eyes are red, through the fire of anger it was even more red glowing and very dreadful."

"His eyes are naturally dreadful, deluded with fire of anger his form was like Rudra's and threatening."

'Just as drops of oil drop from flaming lamps, tears dropped from his enraged flaming eyes.'

'When he was biting on his teeth (enraged), the sound from his teeth resembled the sound of a grinder revolved round by Danavas.'

'Fearing Ravana who was enraged like the time of universal destruction, the Rakshasashid themselves in the very quarter he was looking.'

'The Rakshasas could not go near Ravana who was moving in anger in all directions like the moving and unmoving creations move when chased by the god of death.'

'To provoke Rakshasas for battle, an angry Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, spoke as follows.'

"'I have done penance for thousands of years several times and am a pleased selfborn creator'."

"'By the power of the penancedone by me once, creator Brahma has given me reward, pleased with my penance. I have no fear of Asuras or Devas'."

"'I was given a shield by Brahma, effulgent like the Sun which the Devas or Danavas could not break with their thunderbolt fists'."

"'Today if I, with that shield mounted the chariot go for battle, who can dare to withstand me openly? Even Indra can't'."

"'Let that supreme bow and the great arrows bestowed to me, by Brahma the creator who was pleased, when I fought in battle between Devas and Asuras, be brought to destroy Rama and Lakshmana today accompanied by hundreds of trumpets.'"

'Feeling very sad about the death of his son, cruel Ravana overpowered by anger went thinking to destroy Sita.'

'Redeyed Ravana, looking dreadful with a frightening face, desperate, spoke in a low voice to all Rakshasas as follows.'

'\'My son showed the Vanaras there something which had been killed there to hoodwink as Sita."'

'"I myself will rejoice now in the same way (as Indarjith had done for cheating) making it true. I will destroy that lowly kshatriya, Rama\'s very dear Vaidehi". Having spoken like that to the ministers he took up the sword."'

'In a totally confused state on account of the death of his son, he went to Mythili taking the excellent sword, which was shining resembling pure sky, feeling enraged, accompanied by his wife, and surrounded by the ministers.'

"( As Ravana marched) the Rakshasas in the abode roared like a lion seeing enraged Ravana and embraced each other (thinking of Ravana's victory) and spoke to one another."

'"Seeing Ravana, the two brothers will tremble. By Ravana\'s fury all the four rulers of the world (Indra, Yama, Varuna, Kubera), would have disappeared. He has struck down many other enemies in wars."'

'"Ravana has collected gems from the three worlds as tax. There is none equal to him in might and prowess in this world."'

'As the Rakshasas were talking in that manner, Ravana, deluded with anger, went fast to Vaidehi in Ashoka grove.'

'Highly enraged Ravana, darted just as planet Mars rushed to Rohini in the sky, even while his wellwishers were obstructing.'

"While irreproachable Mythili was being guarded by rakshasi women, she saw him bearing an excellent sword and crossing. When he was repeatedly stopped by friends and obstructed, he was not receding and reaching Janaka's daughter."

'Thus spoke Sita filled with sorrow crying," This evil minded angry one is coming to me to kill me as though I am an orphan even though I have a protector."'

"'I who am devoted to my husband and this Ravana wanted me to revel with him. He has been entreated by me several times. Surely, he, having been rejected by me is dejected, filled with anger and infatuation, intends to kill me, is evident'."

"'Or else, have the two brothers Rama and Lakshmana fallen to unworthy Ravana on my account'?"

'Many Rakshasas rejoiced, calling out their loved ones loudly, making huge noise, were heard.'

'Wow! Has the destruction of the two brothers brought about on account of the grief of the death of his son or on my account? Not able to kill Rama and Lakshmana, has this fierce Rakshasa who does not hesitate, resolved to kill me?'

"'I am a foolish woman. I did not follow Hanuman's advice and had I left mounted on his back, no doubt I would be on my husband 's lap. I did not think in this way'."

"'Kausalya will think her only son has been killed in the battle. I think her heart would break'."

"'She will be crying and keep remembering his birth, childhood, youth, and his rightful actions, and his charm'."

"'Son killed, Kausalya will be disappointed, lost sentience will be offering obsequies, surely and enter fire or water and drown'."

"'Because of the sinful resolve of hunch back Mandara, this grief has come to Kausalya surely. Let her be burnt'."

'Seeing Mythili in this manner grieving, just as Rohini fell under the sway of the Mars planet in the absence of the moon, being away from her husband, Suparsva, an upright minister of Ravana who was pure and wise spoke these words of advice to the Lord of Rakshasas in spite of other ministers trying to stop him.'

'"You being the direct brother of Kubera (one of the guardians of the world), ten head Lord desires to seek Vaidehi in fury and kill her casting righteousness?"'

'"O Hero! Lord of Rakshasas! You made a vow of celibacy essential for Vedic study, so also engaged in your obligatory duties. Do you think of killing a woman?"'

'"O King! Mythili is endowed with charm. Your anger may be exhibited on Rama in battle (not Sita)\'."'

'"Today being the fourteenth day of the dark fortnight, start on the next day that is the fifteenth dark day surrounded by the army and win."'

'"Shrewd carwarrior, you are wise. Seated in the foremost chariot with your sword, kill Dasharatha\'s son and attain Sita."'

'Ravana, the king entered the council, angry like a lion, looking piteous, very sad and sat on the seat.'

'Ravana, endowed with mighty prowess, shrunken on account of his son, greeting all the army chiefs with folded hands spoke as follows.'





'"I shall kill him with huge sharp arrows as the world looks at Rama, once his limbs are struck by you."'

'On Rakshasa king speaking like that, all the diverse battalions together departed swiftly on chariots.'

'All the Rakshasas threw at the Vanaras iron bars, clubs, axes, swords, and arrows, which were capable of destroying the life. Vanaras also attacked Rakshasas with trees and rocks.'

'By the time of sunrise, the most terrific war started between Vanaras and Rakshasas, which became tumultuous.'

'The Vanaras and Rakshasas attacked one another with wonderful maces, darts, swords, and axes in war.'

'As the war was in progress, wonderful dust had risen which subsided by the flow of blood of Vanaras and Rakshasas.'

'There with rivers of blood flowing, elephants and chariots were like banks, horses were like fish, staff of chariots like trees and dead bodies as logs of wood seemed.'

'Leaping and jumping the Vanaras and also the leaders of Vanaras bathed in blood broke all kinds of weapons, staff of chariots and the horses.'

'The monkeys with their sharp teeth and nails tore off the hair, ears, noses, and forehead of the Rakshasas,'

'Just as trees laden with fruits are attacked by birds, each one of the Rakshasas was attacked by hundreds of Vanaras.'

'Then the mountainlike forms of Rakshasas attacked the Vanaras with heavy maces, darts, swords, and axes in frightening ways.'

'The Vanaras being struck by Rakshasas sought the protection of Rama, the son of Dasharatha.'

'Then, the highly energetic and valiant Rama, taking up the bow showered rain of arrows on Rakshasa army.'

"Then Rama entered the army with fire like arrows which were consuming the Rakshasas like the clouds in the sky which can't approach the scorching Sun."

"The night rangers were able to see Rama's terrible action which was difficult for others only after he had performed not otherwise (as they could not see his quick movement)."

'They could not see Rama while he was moving and breaking huge chariots as one would not be able to see the trees in the forest when the wind blew fast.'

'They saw the army shattered, broken into pieces, tormented with darts by Rama but could not make out Rama who was very fast in action.'

'Just as created beings experience their senses and do not perceive their soul, the army experienced the hitting of Raghava by their senses but were not able to perceive him who was hitting them.'

"'Rama is here killing elephants', 'Here is Rama destroying chariot warriors', 'Rama is killing horses, foot soldiers with sharp arrows', saying like that, the Rakshasas were striking one another in the battle. Being there where Rama was, they were mistaking one another for Rama there because of the socalled resemblance and attacking one another."

'The Rakshasas got confused by the supreme missile presided over by Gandharvas, released by Rama, which was burning their army, and were not able to see.'

'In the battle those Rakshasas could see a thousand Ramas at one place and again one Rama alone at another place'

'While Rama was going around in circles with his bow, the Rakshasas were confused, and saw the golden ends of the bow to be like a burning fire stick circling and could not see Rama.'

'People saw Rama in the form of wheel exterminating the Rakshasas on the battlefield, which had the body of Sri Rama as its navel, his strength as its glow, the arrows as spokes, his bow as belly, the twangling of the bowstring as its sound, his virtues and effulgence as the power of his mystic missiles in war. Rama was seen as a wheel of time spirit by the people.'

'In the eighth part of the day, in the battlefield, an army of Rakshasas who were capable of changing their forms at will, constituting a myriad of chariots with wind speed, eighteen thousand fleetfooted elephants, fourteen thousand horses with riders, two lakh Rakshasas fighting on foot exterminated by Rama singlehanded with his arrows that resembled tongues of fire.'

'Rakshasas dead, chariots destroyed, staff of chariots broken, remaining Rakshasas returned to Lanka.'

'With the elephants, horses, and foot soldiers killed, the battlefield was like the ground where mighty Rudra sported in anger.'

"Then, the Gandharvas, Devas, and Siddhas were very happy and praised Sri Rama saying, 'well done, well done' and offered prayers."

'Then righteous Sri Rama said to nearby Sugriva, Vibheeshana, Hanuman, Jambavan and leaders of Vanaras like Mainda, Dwivida, that the power of these arrows are in him and Lord Siva only.'

'"Rama who can work without getting tired put an end to thousands of Rakshasa warriors with his sharp glowing arrows decked with gold. Thousands of warriors sent by king Ravana, mounted on chariots, yoked to horses, of the colour of fire, thousands of warriors who could wage with iron bars, decked in gold, mounted on colourful chariots of golden colour pictures and Rakshasas who can change their form at will, were destroyed by Sri Rama."'

'"Rama who can work without getting tired put an end to thousands of Rakshasa warriors with his sharp glowing arrows decked with gold. Thousands of warriors sent by king Ravana, mounted on chariots, yoked to horses, of the colour of fire, thousands of warriors who could wage with iron bars, decked in gold, mounted on colourful chariots of golden colour pictures and Rakshasas who can change their form at will, were destroyed by Sri Rama."'

'"On seeing and hearing of the others left over, the night rangers felt bewildered and piteous with agony coming together, moving in groups, those who lost husband, son, kin and protectors along with associates crying, stricken with grief."'

'"How did that old, dreadful and hideous Surpanakha approach Rama, whose form is charming like the god of love, in the forest?"'

'"That woman of ugly appearance deserves to be killed. How is it that she was stung with love with that delicate Rama, a well wisher of all beings?"'

'"How did that rakshasi of terrible appearance dare to love that virtuous Rama?"'

'"Because of our bad luck and to the destruction of her own people, Khara and Dooshana, that old lady, with wrinkled face, grey haired (Surpanakha) Rakshasa woman tried to go and attack Raghava, a misdeed which was ridiculed and condemned by the whole world?"'

'"For that reason of Surpanakha, this enmity has been conceived by Ravana and Sita was borne away by the ten headed Rakshasa."'

'"Hope the ten headed Ravana will not touch Sita forcibly, by which undying enmity has been contracted already."'

'"On perceiving that Viradha solicitous of Vaidehi, the Rakshasa was killed by Rama with one arrow. That is sufficient proof (of Rama\'s valour)."'

'" At Janasthana fourteen thousand Rakshasas have been destroyed with his arrows like peaks of fire."'

'"Khara was killed in that combat with sunlike arrows, so also Dooshana and Trisira. That example is sufficient proof."'

'"Kabhanda who lived on blood came roaring, enraged, whose arms were eight meters long was also killed and that is a sufficient example."'

'"Mighty Rama killed the son of thousand eyed Indra, Vali, who resembled mountain Meru. That example is sufficient proof."'

'"Sugriva, who was living on Rishyamukha, dejected and disconsolate was restored with his kingdom. That is sufficient."'

'"Good advice given by Vibheeshana in accordance with righteousness was not liked by him in delusion."'

'"Had Ravana, the younger brother of Kubera followed the advice of Vibheeshana, this Lanka would not have been stricken with grief and turned into a crematorium."'

'"Kumbhakarna of extraordinary strength having been killed by Raghava, and even on hearing that Atikaya who is difficult to disregard, and Indrajith, dear son killed by Lakshmana also, Ravana has not realised."'

'"My son is killed, my brother is killed, my husband is killed," was the sound heard from every family.'

'"Horses, elephants, warriors, even foot soldiers were killed, chariots were destroyed, and hundreds and thousands struck down in war by Rama."'

'"Is it Rudra, or Lord Vishnu, or Indra, who has done hundred sacrifices in the past or is it that the god of death itself has taken the form of Rama and killed him?"'

'"Eminent heroes killed by Rama, hopes of life lost, not able to see the end of fear, we are like orphans weeping."'

'"Graced with the boon of arrows the tenheaded Ravana has not realised the appalling danger to him from Rama."'

'"Neither gods nor Gandharvas, not even fiends will be able to protect, struck by Rama in war."'

'"In every war evil portents are noticed rising up, of Rama destroying Ravana. How much more to say?"'

'"Brahma has lovingly provided protection to Ravana from Devas, Danavas and Rakshasas. He did not seek protection from humans."'

'"Fearlessness of death from human beings attained by Ravana in this way was no doubt terrific to Rakshasas and Ravana."'

'"Tormented by the oppression of Ravana, on account of the boon (given to him by the creator) and intensity of his austerities, the learned worshipped Brahma."'

'"Gratified by the worship of Devatas, wishing them good, Brahma spoke these words."'

'"From now ,all Danavas and Rakshasas will range the three worlds every day permanently in fear."'

'"Getting together all the Devatas marched towards Indra and propitiated Lord MahaDeva, destroyer of Tripura, who Bears the sign of bull on his abode."'

'MahaDeva was pleased by the Devatas and spoke these words for their benefit," a woman will be born for the destruction of Rakshasas."'

'"Just as hunger consumed Danavas earlier, this woman, instigated (by Devatas) will consume all Rakshasas and Ravana."'

'"Because of the misconduct of the evilminded Ravana\'s immoral action, terrific destruction attended by grief stares at us."'

'"Threatened like this by Raghava, we cannot perceive anyone in this world who can protect us now. Just as beings are threatened by the time spirit at the end of the destruction of this world, we are threatened."'

'"Indeed, there is no protection for us here to stay, as we are like the female elephants in the forest covered by huge wildfire."'

'"Great Vibheeshana of the Paulastya race, perceiving opportune time, has sought refuge out of fear."'

'Ravana heard from every house in Lanka sounds of piteous cries and pathetic sounds of the afflicted.'

'Ravana remained silent for long, thought for a moment and assumed a terrific angry form.'

'Biting his teeth, eyes turned red in wrath, Ravana was perplexed. He was difficult to look at even for the Rakshasas.'

'Thus spoke the Lord of Rakshasas indistinctly in anger with his eyes burning as though it would consume them (Rakshasas). He commanded Mahodara, Mahaparsva and Virupaksha who stood nearby saying" quickly instruct the army to go."'

"On hearing the words of the king's order, the Rakshasas stricken with fear, unagitated, started thinking."

"All the Rakshasas with frightful looks saying 'Be it so', having prepared themselves with armor went towards the battlefield."

'All the great chariot warrior spraying to Ravana with folded palms stood desiring success.'

'Then Ravana who was deluded with anger, laughing aloud spoke to Mahodara, Mahaparsva and Virupaksha.'

'Loosening the shafts from the bow, Ravana resembling the Sun at the time of dissolution of the universe said," I shall dispatch Raghava and Lakshmana to the abode of the Lord of death."'

'"Today by the killing the enemy I will take my revenge and also of Khara, Kumbhakarna, Prahastha and Indrajith."'

'"By my arrows covering the sky like clouds there will be no effulgence both in space and in the quarters and not even in the ocean."'

'"Today by the network of plumed arrows released from my bow I shall kill the troops of Vanara leaders\' part by part."'

'"Seated on the chariot I shall knock out the Vanara army by the waves in the form of arrows released from the ocean of my bow."'

'"Like an elephant now I shall torment the ponds in the form of battalions of Vanaras shining like the filaments of lotuses, with their faces resembling open lotuses."'

'"Now with the arrows fixed on their faces the Vanara battalions spread on the earth will adorn the earth like lotuses spread on earth."'

'"Today in the combat each one of the arrows released by me will pierce through one hundred monkeys vehemently fighting with trees"'

'"Today through the destruction of the enemy I will wipe the tears of the one whose son has been killed, whose brother has been killed."'

'"Today, in the combat, my arrows will split open the Vanaras and ceased of life, they will be covering the earth. It will be possible to see the ground only with effort."'

'"Today I shall provide for whatever animals, eagles or flesheating animals the flesh of enemies killed by my arrows."'

'"Let my chariot and bow be ready and brought here. Let the night rangers who survived follow me."'

'On hearing the speech of Ravana, Mahaparsva enjoined the mighty leaders of the army standing there and spoke as follows.'

'"Let the army leaders of mighty valour go hurriedly to search in every house in Lanka for Rakshasas."'

'Then the Rakshasas of terrific looks, and frightening faces holding on shoulders roaring departed with swords, spears, tridents, maces, iron bars, halas, sharp pointed javelins, huge Kutamudgaras, staffs and several discusses, sharp Bhindipalas, Sataghnis and many kinds of excellent weapons.'

'Then by Ravana\'s command. the chief of the army with chariot rider brought the chariot yoked to eight horses quickly. Then dreadful and selfeffulgent glowing Ravana ascended the chariot."'

'Then Ravana surrounded by many Rakshasas set out swiftly rending the earth with all his might and majesty.'

'Duly permitted by Ravana, Mahaparsva and Mahodara who are difficult to overpower and also Virupaksha ascended their chariots.'

'Happy leaders, roaring exultantly, as if breaking the earth, emerged, turning round, desiring victory and sallied forth.'

'Then Ravana surrounded by the army of Rakshasas lifted his bow, like the Lord Yama at the time of dissolution of the universe, went for the battle glowing.'

'Then from the mighty chariot yoked to exceedingly swift horses, the mighty charioteer made his exit from the entrance and saw Rama and Lakshmana there.'

'Then the Sun lost his radiance, and the four directions were enveloped by gloom, the birds made fearful noise and the earth shook.'

'Devas rained blood, horses stumbled, eagles settled on top of the post and jackals howled in a frightening way.'

'His left eye twitched, left arm quivered, face turned pale and indeed his tone became hoarse.'

'Thereafter as Ravana set forth for the battle, all the following forms predicting his death appeared.'

'A meteor had fallen from the sky resembling thunder, coupled with inauspicious eagle cries.'

'Impelled by the time spirit, Ravana set forth without thinking of the terrific portents that had appeared in delusion for his destruction.'

'The Vanaras stood facing the great sound of Rakshasa troops, on hearing the sounds of chariots for the sake of battle.'

'Intense battle took place between the angry Vanaras and Rakshasas challenging one another desiring victory.'

'There the tenheaded Ravana using arrows adorned with gold plumes struck Vanaras and a great war took place.'

"Some Vanaras ' heads were deformed, some were pierced in their hearts, and some had their ears cut off."

'A few were made lifeless, some had their flanks split, some had their heads smashed and few were deprived of their eyes.'

'That time the battlefield was strewn with bodies of Vanaras whose limbs had been severed by the arrows of Ravana.'

"Just as moths cannot bear the blazing fire, the Vanaras could not bear the glowing hail of Ravana's arrows even for an instant."

'Tormented by sharp arrows, the scorched Vanaras fled screaming like elephants enveloped in flames.'

"At that time, driven by Ravana's arrows, the Vanaras fled from the battlefield just like huge clouds are dissipated by wind."

'The Rakshasa king, having destroyed the forest rangers, thereafter, went to Raghava hurriedly.'

'Seeing the defeated and broken monkeys, Sugriva assigned Sushena for their protection and went to the battle making others wonder at his wonderful action.'

'Sugriva, being a hero himself, uprooting a tree as a weapon, went towards the enemy after having assigned Sushena the responsibility of protection of Vanaras.'

'All the leaders of the army themselves seizing hold of huge mountains and trees of several kinds followed his side.'

'Great Sugriva roaring at high pitch in war destroyed several other Rakshasas and went towards the best of Rakshasas.'

'The Vanara Lord of gigantic body, moving like the wind, tortuously destroyed the Rakshasas like a huge wind destroying the universe.'

'Just as clouds shower hail stones on flocks of birds in the forest, Sugriva rained showers of rocks on the Rakshasas.'

'Hit by the rocks rained by the Vanara king, the Rakshasas with heads broken and body mutilated had fallen like mountains.'

'And thereafter, all the Rakshasas shattered by Sugriva, tormented, fallen on the ground were shouting. Seeing that Virupaksha, himself, who is difficult to encounter, holding his bow, announcing his name, jumped from the chariot onto an elephant in a rut.'

'That great charioteer Virupaksha ascended the elephant, frightening like a lion, and rushed towards Vanaras roaring.'

'Releasing arrows at the army of Vanaras and Sugriva, he (Virupaksha) pierced arrows and relieved the Rakshasas of fear and made them happy.'

'The king of Vanaras, pained by the shafts of Rakshasa, roared, and became very furious. He set in his mind to kill the Rakshasa.'

'Then springing up, the valiant Vanara uprooting a tree struck the face of the Rakshasa seated on the great elephant.'

'Overwhelmed by the blow of Sugriva, that great elephant retreated four cubits, distressed, and roared.'

"That valiant Rakshasa hero jumped down quickly from the wounded elephant, seizing hold of a shield made of bull's hide and a sword, advancing towards the enemy who stood firmly, and facing him, as if threatening him."

'Holding a huge rock which was like a mass of clouds, Sugriva, who was very angry, hurled at Virupaksha.'

'Then that exceedingly powerful Rakshasa leader, seeing the rock falling, struck it with a sword, jumping.'

'Struck by the mighty Rakshasa with a sword, the Vanara leader, a heroic one, got wounded, and became unconscious for a while.'

'Then in that great war, Sugriva getting up at once whirling his fist, hit (Virupaksha) him on the chest.'

'Hit by the fist, Virupaksha became very angry and tore the armor of Sugriva by his sword in the forefront of the army. Wounded severely, Sugriva fell on his feet.'

'Dropped down by him (Virupaksha), Sugriva, got up, and gave the Rakshasa a slap with his palm which was equal to thunderbolt that produced a terrific sound like crash.'

'Virupaksha, escaping the slap of Sugriva with great skill, hit him (Sugriva) on the chest with his fist.'

'Then Sugriva, the king of the forest, grew angry and hit the Rakshasa on the forehead.'

'The Vanara, seeing the blow given by Virupaksha, enraged Sugriva hit him with another palm on the temporal bone by which he fell.'

"Hurt by the palm which resembled Indra's weapon, blood started flowing from Virupaksha's body just like water flowed from waterfalls. Bathed in blood, vomiting blood, Virupaksha fell on the ground."

'The Vanaras witnessed Virupaksha who had misshapen eyes, turning his eyeballs in anger, foaming blood flowing from nostrils.'

'Virupaksha rolled, by changing sides bathed in blood, causing sorrow and compassion to Vanaras who witnessed.'

'Thus, both close to each other, both redoubtable armies, of Vanaras and Rakshasas, both powerful and terrific, both mighty, roared as if the great ocean had burst.'

'In the major conflict, each one destroying the other army, it seemed like the midsummer lakes totally lost its water.'

'The Lord of Rakshasas, Ravana, became doubly angry by the destruction of his army and fall of Virupaksha.'

"Rakshasa's army was killed by Vanaras and drastically reduced. Seeing the adversary of God's grace, Ravana was agonized on witnessing it."

'And then Ravana spoke to Mahodara who was close by, one who is difficult to encounter, saying " At this time the hope for my victory is centered in you."'

'"O heroic Mahodara! Today, exhibit your valour by destroying the enemy army. Having received my subsistence, this is the time to repay. Fight well in war."'

'Having spoken like that by the king of Rakshasas, Mahodara entered the army of the enemy like a moth enters fire.'

'Thereafter, the mighty and brilliant Mahodara, in obedience to the word of the king, inspired by his own valour, went to fight with Vanaras.'

'The mighty Vanaras also seizing huge rocks entered into the frightening enemy army of the Rakshasas.'

'In that great war, enraged Mahodara with arrows decked in gold shattered the Vanaras by attacking on hands, legs, and thighs.'

'Thereafter, unable to bear the pain, those Vanaras hit by Rakshasas, went in ten directions and some went to Sugriva for refuge.'

'Seeing the great army of Vanaras defeated in the conflict, Sugriva rushed towards Mahodara.'

'Endowed with great energy, Sugriva, the monkey Lord, seizing a huge mountain like dreadful rock, hurled to kill Mahodara.'

'Then seeing the formidable rock coming towards him, he was not bewildered and immediately struck and broke it with his arrows.'

'That rock, struck by Mahodara fell on the ground shattered and broken into a thousand pieces.'

'Seeing the fragmented rock, Sugriva was deluded with anger, and tearing up a sala tree, he shattered on the Rakshasa (Mahodara) in the battlefield.'

'Mahodara, a scourge of enemy forces, who lacerated Sugriva in that manner, angry, made the tree fall on the ground.'

'Sugriva, picking up that glowing iron bar, exhibiting its top, whirling it around, struck the best of horses of Mahodara.'

'Then the hero, Mahodara, his horses destroyed, jumped from the great chariot, and took hold of a mace.'

'Both the heroes, Mahodara and Sugriva like two bulls holding mace and iron bar respectively, like clouds charged with lightning came roaring in the battlefield.'

'Then provoked by anger, the night ranger, Mahodara flung his mace at Sugriva which shone like the Sun.'

'In that terrible conflict, seeing the mace broken and falling, mighty Sugriva, whose eyes turned red in anger, lifted up his iron bar, struck at the mace of the Rakshasa. The mace fell on the ground and broke into pieces.'

'Then, energetic Sugriva picked from the ground a frightening steel club encrusted with gold on all sides.'

'Sugriva took up the steel club and hurled at Mahodara who took another mace and hit back. Both collided with each other and shattered they fell down on the surface of the earth.'

'Thereafter, both of them fully endowed with strength, with their weapons broken, who resembled glowing fires, fought with their fists.'

'Then both of them again and again striking each other slapping with palms fell down and rolled on the ground.'

'Then quickly getting up striking one another, both the heroes who have never been defeated, pushed each other by their arms.'

'Both being scourge of their enemies, both heroes wrestling were exhausted with fighting. Then the Rakshasa picked up a sword lying not far from there along with a shield.'

'Likewise, Sugriva endowed with speed, a champion of Vanaras, took up a huge sword fallen down with a shield.'

'Then the two, whose limbs ceased, who were knowledgeable in the use of weapons, furious, sprang forward in the battle, both with joy, roaring to destroy one another.'

'Enraged at one another, intent to win, both stretched forth at great speed, going from left to right in circles and encountered each other.'

'Mahodara, a warrior, evil minded one, endowed with great speed, hurled the sword on the shield of Sugriva.'

'While Mahodara was extracting the sword stuck to the head, Sugriva, the elephant of the monkeys, severed the head of Mahodara which was decked with earrings and helmet.'

"Mahodara's head severed and fell on the ground. Seeing that Rakshasa king's army ran from there."

'Sugriva, the monkey leader having killed Mahodara, the Vanaras shouted in joy. The ten headed Ravana became enraged. Raghava was glad.'

'All the Rakshasas became dull and piteous with sad faces. Out of fear they ran.'

'Just as a part of a huge mountain thrown down, an unassailable Mahodara, fallen on the ground, shone there like Lakshmi, just as the Sun shines by his own radiance.'

"Gazing at Mahodara killed by Sugriva, mighty Mahaparsva's eyes turned red in anger. He created a commotion in the army of Angada."

'That leader (Mahaparsva) severed the heads of Vanara leaders from their body just as wind drops fruits from stalks.'

'Then with his arrows, that Rakshasa (Mahaparsva) shattered the arms of some, shoulders of some, sides, and ribs of some Vanaras.'

'By the rain of arrows of Mahaparsva, the Vanaras were dejected and wore a sad look on their face and lost senses.'

'Observing the army oppressed by the Rakshasa leader, Angada, endowed with broad shoulders, exhibited his might speedily like the ocean on full moon days.'

'The foremost of the Vanaras (Angada), taking an iron bar flung on Mahaparsva in the battlefield.'

'By that hit, Mahaparsva became unconscious and fell on the ground, senseless, from the chariot along with the charioteer.'

'Jambavantha, the mighty king of Bears, rushed from his army that looked like a dark cloud. The great hero with his army resembling a heap of black mountain, in his fury seized a huge rock resembling a mountain peak, crushed the chariot and struck the horses.'

'In a short while, regaining consciousness, mighty Mahaparsva struck Angada again with many shafts.'

'Mahaparsva pierced three shafts into the chest of Jambavantha and attacked Gavaksha with many arrows.'

'Seeing Gavaksha and Jambavantha afflicted by shafts, deluded with anger, Angada took hold of a dreadful iron bar.'

"Vali's son Angada got enraged, seized an iron bar which shone like the radiant sun's rays and stood at a distance to kill Mahaparsva. Angada whirling the iron bar round and round hurled it around and thrown at Mahaparsva."

'That iron bar hurled by Angada hit the forehead of the Rakshasa.'

"Courageous son of Vali, enraged, with all speed, slapped the Rakshasa's ear adorned with shining earrings, with his palm."

'Angry Mahaparsva, who was endowed with speed and shining brightly, took hold of an extraordinary battle axe in one hand.'

"Extremely enraged Rakshasa, hurled at Vali's son that axe that was cleansed with oil, the clean strong axe that was like feet of a mountain."

"Angada, full of fury, escaped Mahaparsva's aim to strike his left shoulder blade in violence."

'Angada, who was equal to his father in his prowess, was highly furious and himself clenched his fist which resembled thunderbolt.'

"Angada who knew the vital parts, pierced into the middle of the breasts of the Rakshasa into the heart by his fist which was equal to Indra's thunderbolt."

"In that great conflict, struck by the fist, the Rakshasa (Mahaparsva's) heart broke and killed and fell on the ground."

'Mahaparsva having fallen down in the battle, the army was bewildered, and Ravana was overcome with anger.'

'Highly rejoiced Vanaras roared in high pitch sound. The tall attics and gates of Lanka vibrated with sound. Even the gods, accompanied by Indra, made great sounds.'

'On seeing Mahodara and Mahaparsva killed in the great war, Virupaksha of extraordinary might also killed, Ravana was highly infuriated and addressed the charioteer in the following words.'

'On seeing Mahodara and Mahaparsva killed in the great war, Virupaksha of extraordinary might also killed, Ravana was highly infuriated and addressed the charioteer in the following words.'

'"On killing both Rama and Lakshmana, I will relieve the sorrow of ministers killed and of Lanka from suffering.'

'That tree in the shape of Rama for which Sugriva, Jambavan, Kumuda, Dwivida, Mainda, Angada, Gandhamadana and Hanuman are the principal branches, that tree which will yield flowers and fruit in the shape of Sita will be cut down in the battle.'

'Ravana, the great charioteer, who could surpass many rushed quickly towards Raghava, by the chariot making great noise reverberating in all directions.'

'By that sound, the rivers, mountains, and forests including the earth, filled with the boars, lions and other beasts were shaken.'

'He released an exceedingly formidable weapon called Taamasa which consumed all the monkeys all over and had fallen.'

'As the Taamasa missile had been built and bestowed by Brahma, the monkeys were unable to bear and by their running dust had risen.'

"Ravana's shafts had burnt many hundreds of Vanaras in war and seeing that Rama took a firm stand."

'Thereafter, the tiger among Rakshasas having routed the Vanaras from there, saw the lotus petaleyed Rama, endowed with long arms, an unconquered one, the tamer of enemies, standing with his brother Lakshmana like Lord Vishnu with Indra, holding a huge bow that was scraping the sky.'

'Then the highly brilliant, mighty Raghava along with Saumithri, witnessing the Vanaras routed in war and Ravana coming towards him. joyful Rama took hold of his bow and held in the midst.'

'Then he began to stretch his best bow endowed with an impelling force, sounding as if breaking the earth.'

"Then by Ravana's shafts and Sri Rama's stretching of the bow and sound of twang, Rakshasas fell in hundreds."

"That way when the two princes came near the range of Ravana's arrows, it was like the Sun and the moon near planet Rahu."

'Lakshmana desiring to fight first stretched his bow and took out his sharp arrows which were like peaks of fire and released.'

'As soon as the excellent archer, Lakshmana released his arrows, effulgent Ravana intercepted the arrows in the sky.'

'Exhibiting his skill by hand, he split the arrows of Lakshmana with only one arrow, three with three and ten with ten.'

'Ravana, who won many battles, overlooking Lakshmana went towards Rama standing like a rock in the battle.'

'Ravana the king of Rakshasas coming near Raghava with angry looks in his eyes, showered rain of arrows at Rama.'

"Then Rama immediately seized hold of bhallas and released swiftly seeing Ravana's volley of arrows flowing."

'Thereafter, Raghava with glowing terrific arrows, which were like poisonous serpents split the sharp streams of arrows.'

'Thus, Raghava on Ravana and Ravana on Raghava, in that manner sharp arrows showered on one another.'

'Each of them pushing one another by the speed of the arrows, went round in circles and created wonderful rounds.'

'Just as created beings fight at the end of the dissolution of the universe, like God of death and God of retribution, both were fighting discharging arrows which was frightening to all beings.'

'Then the sky overcast with arrows of different kinds seemed like clouds with flashes of lightning.'

'By the speed of the arrows with sharp heads, with plumes of eagles, the shower of extremely pointed arrows covering the sky made it dark and seemed like windows in the sky.'

'Then the sky covered with darkness of arrows was like two huge clouds rising even though the Sun had set.'

'Each of them desiring to end the other, fought a terrific battle like Vrtra and Indra earlier, a great fight unimaginable for others.'

'Both Rama and Ravana were armed with excellent bows, both highly skilled in war, both adept in the use of missiles, both were foremost in fighting and were unmoved.'

'Whichever course they took, by those streams of arrows were seen like waves in two oceans stirred up by the wind.'

"Then Ravana, who made the people cry, whose hands were engaged in the fight, discharged a row of steel arrows into Rama's forehead."

'Rama, into whose forehead Ravana had stuck arrows, felt them like blue lotuses released from his bow, and did not experience any pain.'

'Then valiant and bright Rama, enraged, chanting the mantras of missiles presided over by Rudra (God of destruction) taking many more arrows, stretching the bow, and fixing discharged arrows.'

'Fallen on the impenetrable shield of Ravana, those arrows did not inflict any pain.'

'Again Rama, who was skilled in the use of all weapons, pierced that king of Rakshasas seated in the chariot with an excellent missile on the forehead.'

'The five headed serpent like arrows released by Rama penetrated and having been repelled by Ravana they entered the earth hissing.'

"Making Rama's missile void, Ravana manifested another missile presided over by demon and released."

"Arrows having lion and tiger face, buzzards and red geese face, eagles and falcons faced, in the same way arrows with jackals' face, wolves' face, terrible with mouth wide open five headed serpent like fearful sharp arrows were released by Ravana."

'Deceitful and energetic Ravana provoked by anger, let loose more arrows of boar faced, dog faced, cocks faced, and alligators and serpents faced hissing like serpents and other such arrows against Rama.'

'In that way facing the demonic missiles, the leader of Raghus, overwhelmed, very enthusiastic, released missiles presided over by God of fire.'

"There Rama produced missiles glowing like fire, like Sun 's face, like moon's face, crescent moon face, face like Dhumakethu, missiles like planets, and star faced, with fire sticks like face resembling flashes and lightning and several others and let loose."

"Struck by Raghava's missiles, the terrific missiles of Ravana melted in the air and split into thousands of pieces."

'Sugriva and other leaders, heroes who can change form at their will and all monkeys rejoiced.'

'Missile being counteracted, Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, doubled the army later in anger.'

'Highly effulgent Ravana used another terrific missile, presided over by Rudra, produced by Maya.'

'Then from his bow issued forth all over flaming tridents, maces, and iron bars like thunderbolt.'

'Several kinds of sharp multitudes of weapons and flaming thunderbolts issued forth like gales at the time of universal destruction.'

'Glorious Raghava, who is the best of those proficient in the use of missiles endowed with great splendour, neutralized that missile (of Ravana) with the missile presided over by Gandharvas.'

"When the missile of Ravana was turned void by the great selfRaghava, Ravana's eyes turned red in anger, and he used a missile presided over by the Sun God."

"Thereafter, brilliant discus of the Sun God, issued forth from wise Ravana's bow at a terrific speed."

'As they landed together from the sky glowing like Sun, moon, and the planets, it illuminated the quarters.'

'Raghava with his shafts shattered the discuses and the weapons of Ravana in the forefront of his army.'

'Rakshasa king, frustrated on seeing the missiles, pierced Rama in his private parts with shafts.'

'Even though pierced by Ravana with ten arrows, Rama, endowed with high energy, was not shaken.'

'Then, Raghava, who had won many battles, became highly furious, piercing Ravana in all his limbs with many arrows.'

'In the meantime, enraged Lakshmana, the brother of Rama, a mighty warrior, seized hold of seven shafts.'

"Lakshmana, who was endowed with extraordinary splendour, for his part, with his shafts which had great force, shattered the device of man's head on the flag post of Ravana."

'Celebrated, mighty Lakshmana struck with his arrows, that hit the head of the charioteer of night ranger, which was glittering with earrings.'

"Then Lakshmana split with five sharpened arrows the bow of Rakshasa king that resembled elephant's trunk."

'Vibheeshana struck with his formidable mace the horses of Ravana which were like dark clouds and huge like mountains.'

'With the horses of his chariot dead, Ravana descended from the huge chariot and exhibited violent rage against his brother.'

'Then, endowed with extraordinary energy, the powerful leader of Rakshasas hurled a flaming thunderbolt like javelin at Vibheeshana.'

'Lakshmana shattered the javelin with three shafts even before it reached him (Vibheeshana). Then the Vanaras raised loud cheer in that huge conflict.'

'The javelin, which was covered with gold, broke into three parts, and fell down like a huge meteor emitting fire sparks from the heavens.'

'Then, Ravana seized hold of a huge javelin shining with its own splendour, a formidable one even for the god of death.'

'That javelin was endowed with speed, resembling thunderbolt in splendour, whirled round by the mighty and evilminded Ravana, shone.'

"In the meantime, seeing Vibheeshana's life in danger, heroic Lakshmana reached him and stood obstructing (the javelin)."

'Heroic Lakshmana stretched his bow and showered volley of arrows and covered Ravana who held javelin in hand.'

'Covered by the stream of shafts discharged by the great self, Lakshmana, Ravana could not shake his hand and was not inclined in his mind to strike (Vibheeshana).'

'Thus spoke Ravana seeing Lakshmana who stood facing him, who rescued his brother (Vibheeshana).'

'"Lakshmana! You are proud of your might of rescuing Vibheeshana. Now this javelin released from me will strike at you."'

'"This javelin released by my bludgeonlike arm will pierce your heart and take away your life."'

'Enraged Ravana, having spoken in this manner, hurled the javelin adorned with eight bells making loud noise, designed magically by Maya, a stupendous one capable of destroying any enemy, which was glowing with shine, aiming at Lakshmana, and roared aloud.'

'Hurled at terrific speed, that javelin, which was equal to thunderbolt, speedily went towards Lakshmana in the forefront of war.'

"Seeing the javelin coming towards Lakshmana, Raghava said 'May Lakshmana be auspicious. May he be well. May your attempt to kill Lakshmana be ineffective and wasted'."

'Released by Ravana in anger, that javelin, which was like poison of venomous serpent, pierced into the chest of Lakshmana who stood fearless.'

'Glowing like the tongue of Vasuki, the king of serpents, flaming, त्त्जवेलिन descended at high speed on the chest of Lakshmana.'

'Thereafter, Lakshmana fell on the ground, pierced by the javelin, deep into the heart from far with great force by Ravana.'

'Watching Lakshmana in that situation, most courageous Raghava, out of brotherly affection felt despondent at heart.'

'He (Raghava) stood confused for a short while as it was, his eyes filled with tears like fire at the end of the universe.'

"Realizing that this is not the time to be disconsolate, observing Lakshmana's efforts, Raghava resolved to destroy Ravana and started a fierce struggle."

'Rama beheld Lakshmana pierced with javelin in the great war bathed in blood and resembling a mountain with a snake penetrated into it.'

"It was not feasible for the best of Vanaras to pull out the javelin (from Lakshmana's body) discharged with great strength from Ravana's hand, despite great efforts."

"It pierced through Lakshmana's body and entered into the earth. Mighty Rama held the terrific javelin with both hands bent it and removed in the course of struggle."

'While Rama was pulling out the javelin, mighty and courageous Ravana struck him in his private parts and all over the body with arrows.'

'Not minding the arrows struck, Rama embraced Lakshmana and spoke to Hanumantha and the great Vanara Sugriva.'

'"O foremost of Vanaras! Take care of Lakshmana by surrounding him. Just as clouds appeared before the chataka bird waiting for long, time has come to exhibit my valour which was awaited for long. Now I will destroy the ten headed Ravana of sinful resolve rightfully in a short while from now."'

'"O Vanaras! I take this truthful vow now in your presence. In a short while you will be seeing the world devoid of Ravana or devoid of Rama."'

'"Leaving the kingdom, and living in D and aka forest, insulted by Rakshasa, Vaidehi in agony, abducted by Rakshasa.'

'"This great terrific sorrow experienced by me, is like the torture of hell. I will put an end to Ravana today and leave him."'

'"Because of whom the Vanaras have been dragged into war, Vali was killed, and Sugriva was made king because of whom the bridge was built on the ocean and crossed, such sinful one has come in the range of my sight today."'

'"This Ravana, having come within the range of my vision, will not survive today, like the serpent having poison in the vision coming in the range of Garuda cannot survive."'

'"You Vanaras, who are difficult to encounter, watch perched on mountain peaks, this fight between me and Ravana."'

"Today you may see Rama's Ramahood in the battle. All Gandharvas, all Devas, Rishis, Charanas of all the three worlds will see my fight."

'All mobile and immobile beings of all worlds, so also on earth, will be able to see. Theywill talk about this war, collected together in the world, which I will accomplish.'

'Having spoken in that manner, Rama collected sharp shafts embellished with shining gold ornaments to strike the ten headed Rakshasa.'

'And then Ravana rained flaming iron arrows and clubs at Rama, which looked like cloud raining arrows.'

'By the arrows loosed by Rama and Ravana on one another clashing with each other, a loud sound arose.'

'Broken as under and scattered arrows with flaming tips of both Rama and Ravana fell from the sky to earth (as if filling space).'

'The dreadful great sound that arose from the bow strings of both Rama and Ravana was astonishing to witness.'

"Seeing Lakshmana struck by exceedingly mighty, evil minded Ravana's javelin and soaked in blood Rama giving intense fight by discharging arrows also spoke as follows to Sushena."

"Seeing Lakshmana struck by exceedingly mighty, evil minded Ravana's javelin and soaked in blood Rama giving intense fight by discharging arrows also spoke as follows to Sushena."

"'Heroic Lakshmana struck by Ravana, fell on the ground and writhing like a snake and rolling made me sad'."

"' As I see Lakshmana, who is more than my life, and loving soaked in blood, my mind is agitated. How can I have the energy to fight?'"

"'Lakshmana, my brother, is praised for his efficiency in war, is endowed with auspicious marks. If he is met with death, what use is my happiness and life for me?'"

"'My heroism is shy, my bow slips from my hand, arrows are dropping, my vision is blurred with tears with my brother gone.'"

"'Seeing Lakshmana in this state, just as in dream, my limbs are retrieving while walking, being on the point of death intense sorrow is growing and the desire to live is gone.'"

'Seeing the brother struck in vital parts and wounded by the evilminded Ravana, Rama was filled with grief and breathing heavily.'

'Beholding his dear brother, who is his life outside him overcome by anxiety, Rama lost senses and gave himself to great sorrow.'

'Seeing the wounded brother Lakshmana in the battlefield, the very sad Rama lost control over his senses and grieved.'

"'O Hero! Even victory for me will not give joy. What pleasure will one have if he desires to see the moon when he has lost vision?'"

"'What purpose is there to fight in battle or in life with Lakshmana lying in the forefront struck in the battlefield?'"

"'Lakshmana who is endowed with splendour followed me to the forest. In the same way I will follow him to the god of death.'"

"'Lakshmana, who loved the kin and was devoted to me, has been led to pass by the Rakshasas.'"

"'Wives can be found everywhere, relatives can be found everywhere but biological sibling brothers are not found in any place.'"

'Grieving in this manner, lost control over senses, and discrimination, Rama was sighing again and again and was pitiable. Sushena, the hero consoling Rama spoke these words.'

"'Without Lakshmana who is difficult to win, what use is kingdom to me? What can I tell mother Sumithra who is the lover of her son?'"

'O Broad shouldered Rama! Enhancer of prosperity, Lakshmana is not dead. His face has not changed, and he has not lost splendour.'

"'His face is radiant and pleasing to see. His palms are like red lotuses and his eyes are so pleasant'."

'"O hero! Those who cease to live will not have such appearance and signs. He who is a tamer of foes is alive. I tell you, do not grieve."'

'"From the movement of his limbs and throbbing of his heart again and again it is known that he is alive."'

'Very wise Sushena, having spoken like that to Raghava, spoke to the great Vanara, Hanuman nearby.'

'"O gentle Hanumantha! Going to that mountain of herbs about which Jambavan had earlier spoken to you, get the herbs from the southern peak of that great mountain. To make Lakshmana the great soul alive quickly go and get Savarankarani, Sarvakarani so also Sanjeevakarani and Sandhanakarani and come."'

'Sushena having said so, glorious Hanuman set out to the mountain of herbs. Not able to recognise the herbs he thought over.'

'Highly brilliant Hanuman used his intellect and thought to seize the peak of the mountain on which herbs had sprung.'

'By reasoning it is known that the herb which is good for him is grown in this peak, for Sushena said so.'

"'If I go without taking Visalakarani, through the passage of time huge mistakes will happen and perplexity will arise'."

'Hanuman, the mighty among the Vanaras, thinking so quickly reached the foremost of the mountains, seized the mountain with both hands by shaking it thrice, uprooted the plants with flowers in bloom and balanced it with his hands.'

'Like a dark cloud filled with water carried by wind, Hanuman held the mountain peak and went in the air from the surface of the earth.'

'Hanuman came at high speed with the mountain and letting it down and resting for a while spoke as follows.'

'"O leader of the Vanaras! I did not know those herbs. So, the mountain peak was brought here by me."'

'The son of wind god, having revealed it like that, Sushena the leader of the Vanaras uprooted the herb and took out.'

'It is a difficult task even for Suras. Seeing Hanuman doing it all the Vanara leaders were amazed.'

"Thereafter, Sushena the foremost of the Vanaras, a brilliant one crushed the herbs and dropped the extract into Lakshmana's nose."

'The destroyer of enemies, Lakshmana, who was pained by the javelin stuck in his body, on inhaling the herb, was devoid of javelin and rid of pain. He got up from the ground.'

'Seeing Lakshmana rise up from the surface of the ground, the Vanaras said Well done and offered prayers very affectionately.'

"Rama the destroyer of enemies seeing Lakshmana saying, 'come come', eyes filled with tears of joy affectionately embraced him and spoke."

"Embracing Saumithri, Rama spoke 'luckily you have recovered from death again and I am able to see you'."

"'Lakshmana! If you had not come out of death, what use is life to me? What is the use of Sita? What is the meaning of life' said Rama?"

'When Raghava had spoken in that manner, Lakshmana spoke, pained by the irresolute talk (of Rama).'

'"You who are of truthful valour having made a vow, now speaking in this way, like a lowly person is not appropriate."'

"'Those who speak truth never fail their vows futile for fulfilment of the vows is a mark of greatness for them'."

'"O Sinless Rama! To be in despair on my account is not fair. Destroy Ravana and redeem your vow."'

'" A victim of your arrow can not be alive just as an elephant fallen into the clutch of a roaring lion with sharp teeth is not possible to live."'

'"I wish to see the destruction of this evil minded one quickly before the sun completes the day and sets."'

'Courageous Raghava, the destroyer of enemies on hearing the words spoken by Lakshmana took up his bow and fixed it.'

"Rama discharged dreadful shafts at Ravana's army in the forefront. Ravana ascended another chariot and went towards Rama, just as the planet Rahu moved towards the Sun."

'Seated in the chariot, the ten headed Ravana showered thunderbolt like shafts just as rain cloud showers on a huge mountain and struck.'

'Sri Rama steadily covered Ravana, the ten headed Rakshasa with shining shafts covered with gold glowing like fire in the battle.'

'Rama standing on the earth and Ravana seated on the chariot and waging war is not fair, declared Devas, Gandharvas and Kinneras.'

'The foremost of Devas, the glorious Indra, on hearing their sweet words called his charioteer Matali and spoke as follows.'

'"Proceed quickly in my chariot to the foremost of the Raghus on the earth, where Sri Rama stands and call him to sit in the chariot as per the words of Devas."'

'Lord of Devas having spoken that way, the charioteer of Devas offering salutations to Devas in obedience spoke these words.'

'"O Devendra, I will do the duty of charioteer duly to the Lord of gods with green horses proceeding quickly", said the charioteer."'

'Thereafter, Matali brought the glorious chariot of Lord of Devas. It was decked with charming gold wheels, body fitted with hundreds of gold bells that shone like the early morning sun, decked with gold on top, green horses with white whisks shining like the Sun, decked with golden net, the horses yoked to staff, and the flag fitted on golden bamboo staff. Descending from the chariot, like from heaven, Matali went towards Kakuthsa.'

'Then the thousand eyed charioteer, holding the whip in hand, from the chariot, offered salutations with folded palms to Sri Rama and spoke these words.'

'"To you, Kakuthsa, who are endowed with great prowess, destroyer of enemies, this chariot has been sent by Indra for your victory."'

'"Here is Indra\'s mighty bow, armour shining like fire, shafts resembling the Sun and stainless auspicious javelin."'

'"O heroic king! With me as charioteer, mounting this chariot, kill the Rakshasa Ravana as Mahendra killed the demons."'

'Speaking like that, Matali went round Sri Rama, and went round the chariot clockwise saluting him. Sri Rama then ascended the chariot, illuminating his splendour to the world.'

'Then a wonderful, severe thrilling fight took place between Sri Rama and Ravana.'

'Raghava who was highly skilled in the use of supreme weapons destroyed that missile presided over by Gandharvas and gods, released by Ravana.'

'The Rakshasa king, the night ranger, became highly furious and once again discharged the most terrific missile presided over by Rakshasas.'

"The shafts released from Ravana's bow were covered with gold and highly venomous like serpents reached near Kakuthsa."

'Those shafts with wide flaming mouths, vomiting fire, glowing, frightening, and striking went over to Rama.'

'Flaming coils like the Vasuki, covering all quarters with poison, enveloped all over.'

'Seeing the dreadful reptiles approaching, Rama discharged the missile presided over by Garuda.'

'By the missile discharged by Raghava those reptiles and snakes turned into golden feathered eagles and by the shine of the feathers, the reptiles flew.'

'Those shafts of Rama in the form of eagles which could change their form at will, destroyed the serpent forms and they flew at great speed.'

'King of Rakshasas knocked back, became enraged and covered Rama with a terrific shower of shafts.'

'Thereafter having showered a thousand shafts on Rama, of unwearied action, Ravana pierced Matali with shafts.'

"Ravana attacked the flag post of the chariot with one arrow and felled it down. Then he released a network of arrows on Indra's horses and struck them."

'On seeing Sri Rama afflicted by the action of evilminded Ravana, the Devas, Gandharvas, Charanas, Danavas also, Siddhas and foremost rishis were despondent. Seeing the moon like Sri Rama eclipsed by planet Rahu in the form of Ravana, the Vanara leaders and Vibheeshana became worried.'

'When the planet Budha comes closer to the Rohini planet presided over by the Lord of creation, people predict bad luck.'

'The waves of the ocean were, as if in fury, waves covered with mist turning around as though to touch the radiant sun rose high.'

'The Sun seemed without radiance like the colour of weapon (grey), in the form of Kabhanda (headless trunk), combined with Dhumakethu.'

'In the sky, the planet Mars too stood in constellation with Visakha star presided over by gods Indra and Agni in heaven, which was propitious for the kosala kings.'

'Ravana with ten heads and twenty arms seizing his bow appeared like the Mynaka mountain.'

'While Ravana with ten heads and arms was ready in the forefront of the battle, Sri Rama had no possibility to fix his arrows.'

"Seeing enraged wise Rama's countenance, all beings on earth were shaken in fear."

'The mountains that were abode of lions and tigers with trees shook and the ocean, the king of rivers, was seen agitated.'

'Dreadful and portentous clouds went in circles all over sky looking like donkeys emitting harsh sounds.'

'Rama became highly furious, most dreadful sounds were rising up and all beings were frightened. Ravana was also afraid.'

'Then from the aerial chariots, Devas, Gandharvas, great Nagas, sages, devils, giants, birds, and eagles watched the duel war that went on between the heroes clashing with different kinds of frightening weapons like at the dissolution of the world.'

'Then watching the great war, all the Suras, Asuras, lost control and overcome with happiness spoke these words with devotion.'

"Firmly established the Asuras uttered 'Victory to the Ten headed Ravana', and Devas for their part pronounced 'Rama be victorious' again and again."

'In the meantime, the evil self Ravana who is called so, as he makes others cry, in intense anger making loud noise, stroking an unassailable weapon which was like the thunderbolt, capable of killing all enemies, a spike which closely resembled mountain peaks, dreadful even to think, like a mass of smoke, sharp and pointed, blazing like at the dissolution of the universe, very frightening, difficult to hand le, like the god of death, a terror for all beings, frightening, tearing, splitting, glowing like trident seized hold of to attack Rama.'

'In the battlefield surrounded by Rakshasa heroes, enraged valiant Ravana took up the trident holding it in the middle.'

'Gigantic Ravana, eyes turned red in anger, raising the trident made formidable noise to make his army extremely joyful in the battlefield.'

'By the horrible sound made by the Rakshasa king, the earth, even the heavens, similarly the quarters and corners trembled.'

"By the loud roar of the evilminded Ravana's sound, all living beings feared and even the ocean was set to tremble."

'Ravana who was endowed with extraordinary valour, taking hold of the trident, addressed Rama harshly in a loud tone.'

'"O Rama! This thunderbolt like trident taken up by me now will take away your life along with your brother\'s."'

'"I, who commend warfare, will quickly kill you today in the forefront of the army and join you with Rakshasa heroes who were killed."'

'"O Raghava! Stay there. Right now, I will kill you with this trident." Having spoken that way, Ravana hurled the trident.'

"The trident discharged from Ravana's hand, made circles of lightning, and covered the atmosphere with its glow and shine along with eight bells making loud sounds."

'Valiant Raghava, seeing the glowing trident that was horrible to look at, loosed a number of arrows at it.'

'Raghava intercepted the trident, just as the fire was obstructed by the flow of water, at the time of universal dissolution, and obstructed.'

"The arrows released from Rama's bow fell on the great trident of Ravana and burnt like moths falling in fire."

'Rama was overcome with fury on seeing his arrows being crushed to powder in the sky on touching the trident and reduced to ashes.'

'Raghava, the enhancer of the joy of Raghus, lifted up the javelin brought by Matali, esteemed by Indra.'

'When mighty Rama lifted up that javelin, it rendered sonorous sounds of bells and lit up the sky like a meteor at the end of the universal dissolution.'

'With the hurling of the javelin by Rama at the great trident of Ravana and on (the javelin) touching the trident, it was broken, lost its splendour and fell down.'

'Rama then released arrows endowed with great speed, shower of multitude of arrows straight into the horses of Ravana and shattered them.'

'Raghava pierced into the chest of Ravana sharp arrows and with great effort three sharp arrows on the forehead.'

'Pierced all over the limbs with arrows, blood flowing from the limbs, he (Rakshasa king) appeared like an Ashoka tree in the gathering.'

"Ravana, who was proud of his skill in warfare, became very angry when he was pained by Kakuthsa's arrows."

'Valiant hero, Ravana, with his eyes flaming in anger, raising his bow, rained arrows at Sri Rama. He continued to rain thousands of arrows just as rain filled the tank, his arrows covered Raghava.'

'Sri Rama did not get agitated, and stood like a huge mountain, even though the network of arrows released from the bow of Ravana covered him in the conflict.'

'Valiant Sri Rama stood intercepting them when streams of arrows covered him, and tolerated them like the rays of the Sun.'

'Thereafter the quickhanded angry night ranger struck into the chest of Raghava thousands of arrows.'

"In that conflict Lakshmana's elder brother looked like a huge Kimsuka tree in bloom in the forest body being covered with blood all over."

'Endowed with extraordinary energy, Kakuthsa, angered by the impact of arrows resembled the Sun at the end of universal dissolution, took up arrows.'

'Then with both Rama and Ravana speedily releasing (hail of) arrows on one another, the battlefield was darkened by arrows, and they were not able to see each other.'

'Then Rama, the heroic son of Dasharatha, overcome by anger, laughing at Ravana, spoke these words.'

'"Lowly Rakshasa! My wife was abducted by you ignorantly when she was helpless. Therefore, you are not valiant."'

'"Having abducted Vaidehi living in the forest by force, when she was desperate and separated from me, do you think that you are a hero?'

'"Timid fellow! You having laid hands on another woman think you are a hero? You, who have done such an action, think that you are a hero?"'

'"O shameless one! You have transgressed morality and traditional practice. You are dissolute and by your pride seeking death. You think that you are a hero!"'

'"By laudable great action performed by you (of abducting Sita and your penance) you have attained fame. You are a heroic brother of Kubera, rich in might."'

'"You will attain the great result of your hurtful action, overpowered by pride and vanity today."'

'"O Evil minded fellow! You boast yourself as a hero, while you abducted Sita like a thief. Shame did not stand in your way."'

'"If Sita had been seen by me forcibly taken by you in my presence, then you would have been killed by my arrows and seen your brother Khara."'

'"O selfish Ravana! Today you have come in my sight by good fortune. I shall send you to the abode of Yama with my arrows."'

'"Now, let your head severed by my shafts lying in dust in the battlefield with the shining earrings be dragged by the carnivorous animals."'

'"Ravana! After your body is caused to destroy and scattered on the ground, let the vultures drink the blood oozing from your chest pierced by the heads of my arrows."'

'"Let the birds tear your intestines as eagles would tear off snakes, now when your body is split and fallen, split by my arrows and ceased of life."'

'Speaking in this way to Ravana who was nearby, Rama the exterminator of enemies rained showers of arrows and covered.'

'The strength, valiance, enthusiasm, and the strength of missiles of Rama, who was desirous of the destruction of the enemy, doubled.'

'All missiles appeared before Rama because of his richness in selfknowledge. In his excessive energy and joy the prince became more skillful with his hands.'

'Rama, who can put an end to Rakshasas, knower of his own self having experienced auspicious signs, began to strike at Ravana more vehemently.'

'By the stones thrown by the Vanaras and rain of shafts from Raghava, the ten headed Ravana was pained and was bewildered.'

"Being confused mentally, Ravana did not start his arrows, nor stretch his bow, nor was able to use missiles and was not able to oppose Rama's valour."

"Ravana's arrows of several kinds being destroyed, perceiving that his death is objective Rama's missiles, and that the time of death appeared, he was unable to act."

"Observing his (Ravana's) condition, the charioteer quietly, slowly withdrew his chariot from the battlefield."

"Enraged out of delusion, by force of destiny, Ravana's eyes turned red in anger and spoke to his charioteer."

'"You dullard! Disdaining me as not capable, lacking manliness, powerless, deficient in valour, timid, incapable, petty, devoid of energy, not knowing conjuring tricks, abandoned weapons, driven out, you act not knowing me in your own way foolishly using your discretion."'

'Not knowing my opinion, for what reason have you removed my chariot in the presence of my enemy, belittling me?'

'"O evil minded one! My fame, glory, valiance and bravery earned over a long period has been wiped out by you."'

'"While my adversary\'s valour is widely known, you brought me back like a timid one, while I love war, while I am to be praised in the presence of my enemy."'

'"O Evil minded one! If out of delusion you are not willing to drive, truly you are influenced by the enemy."'

'What has been done by you is not befitting, this is What an enemy should have done. Being good at heart you have done What is good for enemy.'

'"If you remember that you lived long with me and know my virtues, quickly turn back the chariot before my adversary with draws.'

'When the insensitive Ravana spoke harshly in that manner, to the charioteer who was wishing his benefit, he spoke in friendly language to Ravana.'

'"I was not fearing, nor foolish, not won by the enemy, not negligent also, not lacking friendliness and not forgetting good deeds done by you."'

'Wishing your welfare, for your fame and to protect you with a friendly and pleasant feeling I did that which is good for you. You are unpleasant about this action.'

'"O King! I who wish your welfare ought not to be blamed like an unworthy and pettyminded person by mistake."'

'"O yes! I will answer you. Please listen. like the river entering the ocean speedily is diverted, I have taken back the chariot from the battle.'

'"Great Ravana! After the strenuous task in the battle, there was no exhibition of your valour, and I did not cognize any superiority in your action."'

'"The horses of my chariot were exhausted by dragging, broken down, worn out by the hot sun, and desperate like cows lashed by rain."'

'"Those portents manifesting again and again, that I am seeing, all of them are in the reverse direction (meaning not proptitious)."'

'"Propitious and unpropitious, time and place, good and evil signs and omens, depression and liveliness of the warrior as well as strength and weakness of the one in the chariot must be ascertained."'

'"The earths\' ups and downs, evenness and ruggedness, difficult locations, the right time and place for war should be known in advance and the inner weakness of the enemy also to be known."'

'"To hold the chariot or advance, to go near the (enemy) or retreat, to return back or advance, everything should be known to the charioteer."'

'"The reason for retreating in this way is to give you rest and relieve the horses from the terrible feat and fatigue. I deserve to be excused for this action."'

'"Heroic Lord! I have not brought back this chariot independently (without thinking). I have acted in friendliness to the master (to give rest) not otherwise."'

'"O Tamer of enemies! Order now and in that way, I shall carry out your order in accordance with you wholeheartedly."'

'Ravana was fully satisfied with the words of the charioteer. He praised the charioteer in many ways and spoke like this desiring to wage war.'

'"Quickly drive the chariot towards Raghava. As a policy, Ravana would never turn back on the battlefield without putting an end to the enemy."'

"Fully satisfied with Charioteer's words, Ravana bestowed him with an excellent auspicious ornament of the hand. On hearing Ravana's words, the charioteer advanced the chariot."

'Then seeing Sri Rama standing and thinking of the war, duly prepared, Rishi Agastya came with Devatas to witness the war with Ravana and spoke as follows.'

'Then seeing Sri Rama standing and thinking of the war, duly prepared, Rishi Agastya came with Devatas to witness the war with Ravana and spoke as follows.'

'"O mighty armed Sri Rama! Dear, hear this eternal secret (mantra) which will enable you to win all the enemies in war."'

'"Rama! Listen to this sacred mantra, \'Aditya Hridayam\' which can bring victory, which is eternal, very auspicious, and supremely blessed and prolongs life of all by means of which you will destroy all enemies, root out sins, remove anxiety and always bring victory.'

'"You worship the Sun God, crowned with rays rising up at the horizon, greeted by all gods and demons, who brings light to all and who is the embodiment of all gods."'

'"He is the self in all, glorious, he sustains by his rays of light, the gods, suras and the whole world. He is the Lord of all.'

'"In the same way, he is the body of Brahma the creator, he is Vishnu also, Shiva also, S Kanda, Prajapati, Mahendra, Kubera, time spirit, Yama, Soma, and Varuna also.'

'"He is the god of manes, Vasava, Sadhayas, Aswins, Marutha, Manu, wind god, fire god, life of all beings and god of all seasons.'

'"You are the son of Aditi, the sungod, creator Savitha, the courser in the heavens, the sustainer, the possessor of golden rays, Bhanu, shining with golden rays, the Sun god.'

'"You are the possessor of seven green horses, having a thousand rays, having horse Sapta, destroyer of darkness, mitigator of the suffering of all devotees, giver of happiness, destroyer of all names and forms, the infuser of life in the cosmic egg and having the allpervading rays.'

'"You have the golden cosmic egg in the womb, you are cool, you are the purifier, the ruler of all, bringer of day, who Bears the fire of dissolution in the womb. You are the son of Aditi, blissful personified and destroyer of cold.'

'"You are the Lord of the sky, dispeller of darkness, the master of the three VedasRig, Yajur and Sama, the sender of rain, the friend of water and the courser of the path of Vindhya swiftly.'

'"You are the possessor of heat, adorned with a circle of rays. You are killer of all enemies, tawny destroyer of all, omniscient, lover of all devotees and source of all evolutes.'

'"You are the Lord of all stars and planets. You are the creator of all, resplendent among the splendid, the twelve faces of twelve months. Hail to you.'

'"Hail to you, rising on the east mountain, setting in the west. Hail to the Lord of all luminaries.'

'"Namaskar, Namaskar to the giver of victory, joy born of victory, god having green horses. Hail to you Aditya.'

'"Hail to you of terrible form, of valiant one, denoted by the syllable \'AUM\'. Namaskar to the awakener of lotuses. Namaskar to the fierce one.'

'"Namskar to you, the ruler of Brahma, Siva and Vishnu, to you the Sun god, the spiritual dwelling light in solar orbit, the consumer of all appearing in the form of Rudra.'

'"You are the dispeller of darkness, dispeller of cold, dispeller of enemies, your extent is immeasurable. You are the destroyer of the ungrateful, the ruler of lights, the Lord of all and namaskar to you.'

'"He alone pervades the created beings and remains awake in sleep. He alone is the fire sacrifice as well as the fruits obtained from fire sacrifice.'

'"He is all vedas, as well as all the sacrifices as also the fruits of all sacrifices. He is the supreme controller of all actions in all worlds.'

'"O Raghava! Anyone praying to him will surely not experience grief in straits, in difficulties, in the woods and in times of fear.'

'"Worship the Lord of the universe, the Lord of Lords. Worship him alone with concentration of mind, three times of the day by chanting his name. You will attain victory in war."'

'Agastya having spoken in that way to the mighty armed Rama to worship the Sun God and assuring him that the very moment he will be able to kill Ravana, left in the same way.'

'Then Rama endowed with extra ordinary energy having heard Agastya, was very delighted and stopped worry. He remembered Aditya and chanted in his mind.'

'Sipping water three times and looking at Aditya, the valiant Rama getting purified, with devotion chanted the supreme with delight. Then he took up his bow, fixing his eyes at Ravana, and advanced for war with an allout effort determined to destroy Ravana.'

"Delighted charioteer drove the chariot of Ravana with speed. It was of the shape of the abode of Gandharvas, capable of destroying enemy's army. It had rows of excellent flags, richly endowed, like the best piece of artwork. It was fixed with flag posts in rows touching the sky and filling space. It was yoked to excellent horses adorned with gold chains and equipped with implements for war. The earth was resounding as it was driven as if to crush the enemy's army and its own army was happy."

"Delighted charioteer drove the chariot of Ravana with speed. It was of the shape of the abode of Gandharvas, capable of destroying enemy's army. It had rows of excellent flags, richly endowed, like the best piece of artwork. It was fixed with flag posts in rows touching the sky and filling space. It was yoked to excellent horses adorned with gold chains and equipped with implements for war. The earth was resounding as it was driven as if to crush the enemy's army and its own army was happy."

"The chariot bells fixed to the huge flag post were making sounds, yoked to dark horses, and was shining with splendor with rage. It was glowing like a bright sun in the sky displaying its splendor, like the aerial chariot. It looked like a cloud holding water, releasing water of arrows from Rakshasa king's bow. The king of humans saw this chariot."

'The flow of arrows (from Ravana) released from the chariot were seen by Rama like the flow of water from rain clouds. Seeing that, Sri Rama made terrific sounds by stretching his bow to crescent shape, and it was as if a mountain struck by thunderbolt had broken and resounding and seeing Matali, charioteer of Indra, Sri Rama spoke as follows.'

'"Matali! the enemy\'s chariot is darting forward hurriedly. See him coming in the reverse direction with great speed once again. It strikes my mind that he is surely causing his fall."'

'"Being alert, you drive the chariot towards Ravana, just as wind drives the cloud in the sky, as I wish to destroy him."'

'"Drive the chariot swiftly without confusion, without any agitation, with steady heart and vision, controlling the movement of reins and determination.'

'"You are a driver of great Indra\'s chariot. You are not required to be told. Wishing to fight with rapt attention, I will remind you now and then not instruct you", said Rama to Matali."'

"Matali, the best charioteer of the Devatas, was highly delighted at Rama's words and started driving."

'Then Matali made the chariot turn round and by the dust rising from the rolling wheels of the chariot, Ravana was shaken.'

'Then furious Ravana, the ten headed Rakshasa, whose eyes turned coppery in anger, struck Rama with arrows.'

"Rama who was provoked by the assault and army was perturbed. He took up Indra's bow of extraordinary impulse and of high speed like sunbeams."

"The arrows endowed with very high speed, glowing in radiance like the sun's radiance, holding the arrows, each one desirous of killing the other stood facing each other, came near, and started fighting like lions in the great war."

'Thereafter, the Gandharvas, Devas, Siddhas and sages longing for the end of Ravana came there to witness the duel.'

"Devas rained blood on Ravana's chariot, wind blew in circles intensely from left to right."

'In the sky, a huge flock of eagles hovering on the chariot of Ravana went following the chariot wherever it went.'

'Lanka seemed glowing in red colour like at dusk, and as though the earth was burning, shrouded with Japa flowers, even though it was daytime.'

"Meteors and huge fire dropped there indicating Ravana's end. Seeing them, Rakshasas were sad."

'Wherever Ravana went, the earth shook. Many Rakshasas felt their hands clasped.'

'The rays of the Sun fell in front of Ravana, in red, yellow, white, and dark like minerals on the mountain.'

'The vultures followed by shejackals vomited, burning fire from their mouths indicating inauspiciousness and screamed.'

'The unfavourable wind that blew in war, clouded the sight of Rakshasa king.'

"Without clouds, terrific thunderbolts of Indra (rain) dropped on his (Ravana's) army all over causing unbearable sound."

'All directions and intermediate points were enveloped by darkness by the shower of dust and the huge sky was obscure.'

'Hundreds of minas making frightening sounds, fighting in terrific manner emitting dreadful cries had fallen on the chariot there.'

"His (Ravana's) horses were letting out fire sparks from their hips, tears, water, and fire from their eyes at a time, continuously."

'In that manner, many frightful and dreadful objects falling indicated destruction of Ravana.'

'On all sides appeared indications of signs of victory for Rama, displaying beings delightful and auspicious.'

"Sri Rama was very delighted over the appearance of good signs of his own victory and thought 'Ravana is destroyed by me'."

'Then there ensued a fierce duel between Rama and Ravana that was fearsome to the whole world.'

'Then, both Rakshasa army and huge Vanara army, stood motionless holding their weapons ready.'

'Then, when the mighty human and the Rakshasa were both engaged in the battle, distracted at heart, all experienced supreme wonderment.'

'All the army on both sides lifted their hands up, holding different kinds of implements, and were amazed looking at them and did not attack one another.'

'The army of Rakshasas was looking at Ravana and the Vanaras were looking at Raghava with astonishment as though it was a wonderful picture.'

'Both Ravana and Rama, seeing their portents, firmly resolved in mind with indignation, fought fearlessly.'

'Kakuthsa Rama, sure of his victory and Ravana thinking surely of his death, exhibited their prowess totally in the battle, with determination.'

"Thereafter, valiant ten headed Ravana, fixing arrows released them in anger aiming at the flag post of Rama's chariot."

"Those arrows, without reaching the post on Indra's chariot, touching the chariot fell on ground."

'Valiant Rama too stretching his bow in anger and thinking of returning back blow to Ravana and started compliance.'

"Rama, intolerant like a snake, targeting Ravana's post, released a sharp bright glowing arrow."

'Glorious Rama aiming at the flag post of Ravana, released an arrow that tore the post and went into the ground.'

"Ravana's flag post fell down, struck by Rama. Mighty Ravana, observing his post being struck, became intolerant, and burning in anger, laughing, rained showers of arrows at Rama out of fury."

"Ravana with his burning arrows pierced Rama's horses. Those horses were wonderful as they did not stagger or reel as if hurt by lotus stalks and remained complacent."

'Ravana perceived that the horses were just unperturbed by his arrows, became enraged and showered arrows excessively.'

'Ravana used maces, iron bars, discuses, clubs, mountain peaks, trees and also tridents and axes.'

'Unwearied at heart, Ravana let loose rain of arrows created by magic in thousands.'

'In that war, noisy, alarming, fearful loud noise of weapons of different kinds, in huge numbers, descended.'

"Obstructed by Raghava's chariot on all sides, the arrows covered the Vanara army and up to the sky."

'Seeing the ten headed Ravana releasing arrows with enthusiasm, not thinking of anything in his mind, quickly Kakuthsa laughed at them, fixed pointed arrows, and released hundreds and thousands.'

'Seeing the arrows in the sky released by Rama, even Ravana released arrows up to the sky. With the arrows released by both of them, the space became resplendent and by the network of arrows covering it seemed like another sky.'

'The arrows released by both Rama and Ravana were without result. None failed to reach the target. None failed to complete the target. The arrows were colliding with one another and fell on the ground.'

'Discharging from right and left, the two heroes without break vehemently released dreadful arrows that covered the sky and left no breathing space between them.'

"Ravana struck Rama's horses and Rama struck Ravana's horses blow to blow at that time."

'Both became furious in that way and the best duel took place for a moment that was fierce and horipulating.'

'As Rama and Ravana were thus fighting in war, all beings watched with astonishment in mind.'

'Both of them were moving quickly seeking to gain one another, very furiously persevering.'

'Both striking one another diligently, going in circles moving forward and backward displaying feats, went on.'

'Ravana hurting Rama and vice versa displaying quickness in retaliation and speed of arrows, the fight happened.'

'The network of arrows released by both of them from the chariots were like water streams from two clouds in the battlefield'

'Then those two, having seen many movements, once again stood facing each other in the battlefield.'

'The two chariots stood facing each other on the battlefield once more, the axle of one chariot facing the axle of another chariot, the flag of one with another flag, the standard with another standard, the face of one horse with the face of another horse stood and it seemed as though they were together.'

"Thereupon, Rama, stretching the bow, released four sharp glowing arrows at Ravana's four horses and drove them back."

'Fallen prey to anger for retreating the horses, the ten headed Ravana released pointed arrows on Raghava.'

"Raghava, though wounded by the mighty Ravana's arrows, did notexperience suffering or agitation, nor disquiet."

'The ten headed Ravana with his thunderbolt like hands hurled arrows and struck the charioteer of Rama, making sounds like thunder.'

"Even though the arrows fell on Matali's body at great speed, he did not feel perturbed or experience even slight suffering."

'Rama was furious for tormenting Matali like that, but not for hurting him and in fury discharged a network of arrows on him (Ravana) and diverted him.'

"Heroic Raghava thereafter, let loose shafts in twenties, thirties, sixties, hundreds, and thousands at Ravana's chest."

'Enraged Ravana, the king of Rakshasas, also in return, retaliated with maces and mallets.'

'Once again ensued a tumultuous war fought with maces, mallets, and iron bars, caused hair to stand and the resound of the speed of weapons caused agitation in the seven seas.'

'By the agitation and sounds in the seas, all the Danavas and snakes in thousands inhabiting the seas got distressed.'

'The entire globe with its mountains, gardens and forests shook, the Sun lost his radiance, even the wind did not blow.'

'Thereafter, the Gandharvas, Devas, Siddhas, great sages, Kinneras and huge serpents all of them became anxious.'

'"May the hosts of sages, Devas, cows and brahmanas be auspicious. May all the worlds endure forever. May Rama conquer Ravana, the Rakshasa king," chanting in that manner all witnessed the terrific war between Rama and Ravana that caused hair to stand.'

"Gandharvas and Apsaras watching the combination of Rama and Ravana fighting an unimaginable war said that sky is its own analogue for sky, sea is its own analogue to sea, in the same way is the struggle between Rama and Ravana is unique like Rama and Ravana's struggle and looked at the combat."

'Then the mighty armed Raghava, enhancer of glory, in wrath like a venomous snake, fitting the bow with arrows cut off the head of Ravana graced with shining earrings. Then the three worlds witnessed the head cut off and fallen on the earth surface.'

"A similar looking head arose on Ravana's head. Rama, endowed with a quick hand, cut off by his hand the other head."

'Before cutting that second head of Ravana again another head appeared.'

"Rama cut off the afore said head with Indra's thunderbolt like arrows. In that way equally charming a hundred heads were struck off."

"Rama, knower of all shastras, valiant, enhancer of Kausalya's joy, well versed in the use of weapons, was not able to see the end of Ravana's life. He started thinking."

"'Earlier, by my arrows, Maricha was killed, Dushana and Khara were killed, Kabhanda was killed in Krauncha forest, Virada was killed in Dandaka forest. By which arrows Sala trees were cut off, mountain was broken, ocean was agitated, and Vali was killed, are wasted with Ravana, who is less brilliant in war. What is the reason?'"

"Even though Raghava was thinking so, yet remaining alert in the duel, rained arrows on Ravana's chest."

'Valiant enemy of Raghava also seated in the chariot, rained three hundred, sixties, hundreds, and thousands of arrows.'

'Great war commenced in the sky, as well as on the earth, and on top of mountain again, which was horipulating,'

'The Devas, Danavas, Yakshasas also the fiends Demon, Nagas and Rakshasas watched the great war that continued for seven days and nights.'

'The fight between Rama and Ravana continued all day and night, without stopping for a moment.'

'Matali reminded Rama in this way," O heroic Rama, why are you doing this way, as if you do not know?"'

'"O king! As spoken by Suras, the destruction of Ravana has come now. Use the missile of the creator Brahma."'

'Suggested and reminded by Matali, valiant Sri Rama seized hold of the wonderful glowing arrow, bestowed by Brahma, and given by the divine to sage Agastya first. Breathing heavily, like a serpent, Rama seized the arrow.'

"Earlier, this powerful arrow was created for Indra's sake by Brahma and was bestowed to Indra, the king of gods, who was desirous of conquering the three worlds."

'The wind god presided over its feathers, the fire god and the Sun god presided over its head, its energy was presided over by Meru and Mandara mountains and its weight by the sky.'

'Its form was shining with feathers, decked with gold, splendid with all elements and brilliant like the sun.'

'Like fire at the time of dissolution of the universe, burning like venomous serpent, capable of splitting hosts of enemy, men, elephants, and horses and quick in action.'

'Capable of splitting gateways, iron bars, even mountains, smeared with blood and brain marrow of various Asuras, of dreadful appearance.'

'Strong as thunderbolt, loud sounding, dispersing every deceitful kind of army, frightening to all kinds of beings, hissing like a serpent.'

'In war, it provides food for buzzards, vultures, and herons, and also jackals and Rakshasas, causing terror in the form of Yama (God of death).'

'Provides delight for Vanara chiefs, causes destruction of Rakshasas, provides picturesque plumes of eagles to arrows.'

'The great arrow, was a dispeller of fear of enemies to Ikshvaku kings, which takes away the glory of enemies, delighting to oneself, chanting vedas as per tradition, charging with mystic power, mighty strong Rama fitted to the bow.'

'As Raghava started fixing his excellent arrow, all beings got terrified and the earth shook.'

'Rama, provoked by anger, stretched the bow to full length, very well prepared, released the arrow on Ravana, which was capable of tearing into the vital parts.'

"Like the thunderbolt hurled by the arm of Indra, difficult to obstruct, capable of bringing life to an end, that arrow released by Rama penetrated into Ravana's chest."

'Loosed at high velocity, that arrow capable of putting an end to the body, split as under the heart of evilminded Ravana'

"That arrow which was capable of putting an end to the body took out Ravana's life and smeared with blood, it entered the earth."

'That arrow of Rama, on killing Ravana, soaked in blood, having accomplished the task quietly reentered its quiver.'

'Thus, when Ravana was killed and lost his life, the bow and arrow in his hand also fell along with his life breath.'

'The king of Rakshasas, who possessed terrific speed and courage, having lost life, fell on earth like Vrttra struck down by thunderbolt.'

'Seeing their Lord killed and fallen on the ground, the leftover night rangers fled all over in fear.'

'Seeing Ravana killed, the Vanaras holding trees went roaming on all sides, feeling triumphant.'

'The Rakshasas hurt by the Vanaras, lost battle and their king killed, were piteous and went towards Lanka in fear, eyes filled with tears.'

"Then the Vanaras, feeling triumphant, got highly excited over Rama's victory and the death of Ravana, and shouted aloud in joy."

'And then thirty drums of gods sounded in the sky. Divine fragrant pleasant breeze blew.'

"Then from heaven, a very pleasing shower of flowers, difficult to know from where, fell on Raghava's chariot covering it and dropped on the ground."

"The gods too praised Sri Rama, the great soul saying, 'Well done, Well done', from the heaven, which was distinctly heard."

'When Ravana, a terror of all worlds was killed, the Charanas and Devas were filled with great joy.'

'The foremost of the Rakshasas killed, Raghava was pleased and having fulfilled the desire of Sugriva, Angada, Vibheeshana, he made them happy.'

'Then the host of gods attained tranquil, quarters brightened, sky became clear, earth no longer shook, wind blew and even the Sun became steady and radiant.'

'Then all of them (hosts of gods) coming together, accompanied by Lakshmana, Sugriva, Vibheeshana, and Angada along with other friends, happy about the victory in the battle offered prayers to charming Sri Rama in accordance with tradition.'

'Vibheeshana, seeing his brother killed and lying in the battlefield, lamented immersed in sorrow.'

'"O valiant, powerful and renowned king! You who were skilled in all fields and in polity, accustomed to a sumptuous bed, why are you lying on ground?"'

'"Decked with armlets, motionless are your arms, broken, knocked down with the crown, radiant like the Sun."'

'"Hero! That which was predicted by me earlier, which did not find your favour due to your infatuation, has come true."'

'"Either Prahastha or Indrajith or other Rakshasas, or even Kumbhakarna, an exceeding car warrior, nor Atikaya or Naranthaka or you also did not care for my counsel. Its consequence has come now."'

'" As this hero, the wielder of weapons has fallen down on ground, the prudent one who was at boundary, disappeared he who was the form of righteousness, departed he who was a repository of might, thrown down and out of sight he, who was praiseworthy for all, lost position. With the hero falling down, it seems the Sun has fallen down, the moon plunged into darkness, fire became extinct, and the enthusiasm of people wasted."'

'"With the tiger among the Rakshasas fallen asleep like this in the dust in the battlefield, strength of the people departed. What is left in this world?"'

'"The great tree in the form of Rakshasa king, with its firmness as leaves, stubbornness as its blossom, austerity as strength, valour as strong roots, was crushed by the tempest of Raghava in the battlefield."'

'"Ravana\'s prowess as tusks, father and grand fathers\' race as back of the body, wrath as lower body and graciousness as proboscis, overthrown by a lion in the shape of Ikshvaku race having killed him he is lying asleep thrown down."'

'"The prowess and exceeding energy of Ravana as flames, his sighs as smoke, his own strength as heat, endowed with might, that fire of Rakshasa has been extinguished by the rainy cloud in the shape of Rama in the battlefield."'

'"Rakshasas who followed as tails, humps and horns, Ravana the conquerors of enemies, like elephants in pride, animality as ears and eyes, the bull in the form of Rakshasa Ravana was killed by Rama, the master of earth in the form of tiger."'

'Thus spoke Rama to Vibheeshana, who was overcome with sorrow and speaking with reason, his determined opinion.'

'"This Ravana is not destroyed without power in war. He is of terrible prowess, of extraordinary enthusiasm and fought without any fear and fallen."'

'"Those kings who follow duty steadfast, desiring advancement, fearless in the battlefield, who die in that way should not be mourned."'

'"He who is wise, and the three worlds fear him, including Indra, the Lord of gods, when brought under the sway of death according to timespirit, should not be mourned."'

'"Not only that, in war, he will only will be victorious is not true now or before. Hero may kill the enemy or will be killed by the enemy."'

'"This course has been practised in the past by ancient kings for those killed in war. Warrior killed in war is not to be mourned\', is true."'

'In principle, in that way, decide the action, freed from grief, considering what action is required."'

'Having spoken that way by the valiant prince to Vibheeshana, who was immersed in grief, spoke to Rama for the good of his brother.'

'"He who has not been defeated in battle by even gods or Indra combined together in a trial of strength has been routed by you like the flow of the ocean divides on reaching the shore."'

'"He bestowed gifts to mendicants, nurtured dependents, filled his friends with wealth, and held grudges against enemies and destroyed them."'

'"He maintained sacrificial fire and practised austerities. He mastered vedas and was even doing rituals. To the foremost brother\'s departed soul, I desire your permission to do the rituals."'

'On seeing Ravana killed by the great soul Raghava, the Rakshasas from the gynaeceum stricken with grief rushed out.'

'Numerous women, though obstructed, were rolling in dust, with dishevelled hair and crying like cows which had lost their calves.'

"The Rakshasa women along with Rakshasas came out of the north gate and entered the battlefield screaming 'O son', 'O husband' and crying, seeing the trunks soaked in blood and mud on the ground and went about all over."

'Bellowing like female elephants that had lost their husbands, the women roared eyes filled with tears on account of grief for their husbands.'

'They looked at the gigantic body of Ravana of extraordinary valour, full of splendor, killed and lying like a heap of dark mountain on the ground.'

'In the battlefield they saw their husband lying, and precipitately fell on his limbs like broken creepers in a garden.'

'Indeed, out of respect some embraced him and roared aloud, some held his feet and wept, some held his neck and started weeping.'

"Some lifting their arms threw themselves on ground, some rolled, some beholding the dead Ravana's face became deluded."

'One held his head on her lap, and one held his face and looking at it shed tears, like nature covers lotus with dew and roared.'

'Afflicted on beholding their husband Ravana, killed, and lying on the ground, the Rakshasa women again and again cried exceedingly in many ways overcome with grief.'

'"By whom Indra feared, by whom Yama feared, at whom king Visrava feared, by whom Pushpaka was deprived to Kubera in war, by whom Gandharvas and ascetics were afraid of, by whom high souled Suras were afraid of lies in the battlefield asleep."'

'"He, who did not know fear from Asuras or Uragas, experienced fear from a mortal."'

'"He, whom Devatas, Danavas and Rakshasas could not kill, lies asleep, killed by a mortal who came by walk."'

'"He, who could not be killed by Suras, Asuras or Yakshas, such a hero lies like a weak person devoid of strength, killed by a mortal, is resting."'

'Those women grieving in that way roared aloud, lamenting again and again cried, afflicted by sorrow.'

'"You did not listen to the good advice of your dear and good at heart. You brought Sita and destroyed yourself and all of us at a time."'

'"Even though good advice was given by your dear brother Vibheeshana, in your delusion evidently you sought your own destruction."'

'"If Sita, princess of Mithila had been returned by you, this great destruction of the very root and calamity with you and for us would not have happened."'

'"If your brother\'s desire had been fulfilled Rama would have turned to be our friend. We would not have been widows. Our enemy\'s desire would not have been fulfilled."'

'"With evil intention you kept Sita under detention. These Rakshasas and you and us all the three are together destroyed."'

'"O Foremost of Rakshasas! You have acted according to your desire alone is not sufficient as divine will make you do everything. He is killed whom destiny kills."'

'"O mighty armed Ravana! For Vanaras, Rakshasas and you too, this destruction in this war has come by divine grace."'

'"In the world, to change the divine course of action, it is not possible with wealth, or will or by prowess or king\'s orders."'

'Then from among the wives lamenting, the first wife, dear to Ravana gazed at her husband lamenting piteously.'

'Looking at her husband Ravana killed by Rama of inconceivable exploits, Mandodari piteously lamented there.'

'"O mighty armed Ravana! O, brother of Visrava! When in anger even Purandara was afraid to stand before you, it is well known."'

'"For fear of you, even great seers, illustrious Gandharvas, Charanas also went in all directions, is well known."'

'"O Lord of Rakshasas! Just by Rama, a mortal, you have been killed in war. Are you not shy of it?"'

'"Winning the three worlds by your valour, you are glorious, irresistible and beyond reach. How did the wanderer in the forest strike you?"'

'"You lived in an inaccessible place and are capable of assuming any form at will. It is not believable how you have been destroyed by Rama."'

'"You are always well equipped with the army, so such action (killing you) is not possible for Rama."'

'" At Janasthana your brother Khara, who was surrounded by many Rakshasas, was killed by a mortal in the same manner."'

'"To Lanka, which is inaccessible to anyone, Hanuman entered by increasing his valour. Knowing this we worried (that Rama may not be mere mortal)."'

'"When these terrific Vanaras constructed a bridge over the great ocean, I doubted in my mind at that time itself that Rama is not a mortal."'

'"Or else, the god of death would have come in the form of Rama for your destruction, having right knowledge and taking an inconceivable recourse.'

'"Or else O king of extraordinary might! Indra would have come to overthrow you in the form of Rama. Indra has no energy even to look at you in the battlefield."'

'"It is evident that this Rama is a great yogi, eternal, who has no beginning, middle or end. He is supreme, greater than great and stands beyond darkness, a sustainer. He holds conch, discus, and mace in hand. He has symbols of Srivatsa on his chest. He is ever rich, invincible, everlasting, steady supreme soul and of truthful valour. He is prosperous, a mass of brilliance, Lord Vishnu and the Lord of all worlds, a wellwisher of all. He has come in mortal form, in the form of Vanaras also, and by all gods. He vanquished you along with Rakshasas is evident."'

'"In the past by winning your senses you gained the three worlds. Now it seems as though the senses have recollected and taken their grudge. You have lost control over your senses, thereby you are killed by your enemy."'

'" At Janasthana when your brother Khara was surrounded by many Rakshasas also he got killed by a mortal. So also, when Hanuman entered the city of Lanka, which is difficult to enter even for gods, I got perturbed."'

'"You were advised by me not to have any hostile action with Rama. You had not listened to me. This is the result of that action."'

'"O Foremost of Rakshasas! To the destruction of your wealth, life and your own people you suddenly developed passion for Sita."'

'"O evil minded king! Sita is to be respected even more than Arundathi or Rohini. Your arrogant action to her is unworthy."'

'"O king! You dishonoured your wives and me. Sita, who is tolerant as the goddess of earth, prosperous, goddess of fortune, who is fond of her husband, charming in all respects, living alone in the forest, an auspicious one, desperate, was brought in disguise by you. Before you cherished your desire to be in union with Mythili, surely you got burnt by her austerity."'

'"When you touched Sita of slender waist, at that time itself you were not burnt. All gods including Indra headed by fire god are approaching you with hostile intention."'

'"When time comes surely one who does sinful action will reap the result. There is no doubt that the doer of a terrible action will be destroyed."'

'"Mythili by race is not superior to me even a little, not in civility. Out of infatuation you did not perceive this."'

'"Death does not happen without reason for any being. To you this happened because of getting Mythili."'

'"On account of abducting Sita, you invited death from a distance. Devoid of sorrow, Sita will sport with Rama."'

'"O Hero! Whose stock of merit was less, that you have tumbled down into an ocean of grief. I, having sported with you, clad in picturesque robes and the like, by the aerial car Chaitra ratha on mount Kailasa, Mount Meru and Mandara as well as in divine gardens all over, and various lands with matchless splendour, have been deprived of sensual pleasures because of your falling down. What a pity I am surrounded by ordinary women changed into another woman with fleeting fortunes!"'

'"Oh King, My Lord! Your shiny eyes with delicate eyebrows, which used to be shiny and delicate your prominent nose brilliant skin resembling moon in pleasantness, lotus in beauty, and Sun in radiance your illuminating crown, your shining crown with gems like the peaks of mountains your coppery lips, glowing earrings, rolling eyes were pleasing earlier in the drinking parlours through inebriety, and your auspicious mouth having been indulged in pleasing talk. Today you are pierced by Rama\'s arrow and shattered with blood flowing, marrow of brain scattered, soiled by dust, dirtied and without any shine."'

'"Ha! You are dead. I am widowed. I am foolish as I never thought that this stage will come."'

'"My father is a king of Danavas, my husband is a Lord of Rakshasas, and my son has won over Indra, the Lord of gods, thus I was excessively proud."'

'"Those who are capable of protecting me are warriors, as they are capable of crushing the enemies and renowned for their pride of their strength. They had no fear from any quarter. I had this conviction in my mind."'

'"O Bull among Rakshasas! You are such a famous king. This fear from a human is unknown. How did it come?"'

'"O king! Your body which is gigantic like a mountain, dark like a sapphire adorned with Keyuras, Angadas, necklaces of cat\'s eye gems and pearls, which were charming when in the battlefield, and shone brightly on your body with the lustre of your jewels like a rainy cloud with flashes of lightning. It is fixed with numerous arrows cut into pieces by darts and difficult to touch. Since the darts are inserted deep into your vital parts, it is not possible to perform ablution. It is dark, soaked in blood, broken, and crushed like a mountain hit by thunderbolt. Alas, it is not possible to embrace."'

'"Ha! Could it be a dream? Is it true? How could you be killed by Rama? You who can kill death also, how did you fall prey to death?"'

'"You are the enjoyer of the treasures of the three worlds, you are the great annoyer of the three worlds and conqueror of the world, and you are the one who lifted up Lord Shanakara\'s seat."'

'"You are a subduer of the arrogant, who manifested prowess, who tormented the world, who made the world cry with insolent words."'

'"He, who commanded uttering harsh words in the presence of the enemy, who protected his own brand, who killed those indulged in terrible deeds.'

'"He who killed thousands of chiefs of Danavas, Yakshas, and subdued Nivatakavachas in combat"'

'"He, who obstructed performance of sacrificial rituals, protected his own people, who violated code of conduct in comb at by using conjuring tricks"'

'"Brought by force virgin girls of Devas, suras and human beings from here and there forcibly and caused the enemy women to mourn"'

'"In the island of Lanka, he provided for his own sexual pleasures in a concealing manner. He was the foremost among those providers of sensual pleasures."'

'"Such a husband of mine endowed with this kind of influence, killed by Rama, is lying here. Beholding the lover gone, I am holding this body and standing here."'

'"O Lord of Rakshasas! Having slept on the best of beds, you are now lying here on the hard ground, body covered with dust. Where are you sleeping?"'

'"When my son Indrajith was killed by Lakshmana I was in intense grief. Now you have fallen."'

'"Disconnected with relatives, forsaken by you also, deprived of sensual pleasures, I shall grieve permanently."'

'"O king! Today, take me on your journey which is very difficult. Stricken with sorrow I cannot live without you."'

'"You are leaving me, a desperate one, stricken, crying. Why are you desiring to go? Why are you not replying to me?"'

'"Lord! How is it that you are not angry seeing me coming forth walking through the city gate?"'

'"O lover of wives! Your wives have come out leaving their veils from their abode to see you. See them, and how is it that you are not angry?"'

'"These people who were with you are always sporting my Lord. Why do you not call them, why are you not consoling them, or inviting them?"'

'"King! Chaste women of noble lineage being righteous, serving the elders have been widowed by you. Because of their curse, you have fallen under the sway of your enemy and because of that, this has come to you."'

'"King! \'The tears of noble women should not fall on the earth\'s surface\' is a popular saying. This calamity is truly a result to you in return."'

'"King! You have invaded the world by your brilliance and were proud of your heroism. How did you do this mean act of abducting a woman?"'

'"By your cowardly action of creating an illusory deer, you have brought Rama\'s consort from the hermitage."'

'"Indeed, I do not remember you being cowardly in war. The timidness that appeared in you is a sign of the adverseness of fate, for your destruction."'

'"Mighty armed King! Your brother, who is a knower of matters relating to future, present and past, a truthful one, after your getting Mythili, thought for a while and sighing spoke this. \'The destruction of Rakshasa chiefs is now sure to happen\', has come true.\' The desire for sensual pleasures and anger has resulted in your death and resulting in this calamity."'

'"By this major disaster of yours, the very root has been destroyed. With the extermination of the Rakshasas, the entire Rakshasa clan is orphaned now by your action."'

'"You are famous for your strength and courage. I do not need to wail for you. Being a woman, by nature I am compassionate, and my mind is moving towards sorrow."'

'"You have taken away the good and evil deeds done by your death. I\'m thinking of myself and wailing."'

'"O Ten headed king! You did not heed the good words of advice given by your friends. You did not totally heed the good words spoken by your brothers."'

'"You have not listened to the meaningful, agreeable and reasonable advice given according to tradition by Vibheeshana."'

'"You did not take the advice of both Maricha and Kumbhakarna. You have also not taken the advice of my father because of the pride of your valour. This kind of result is the consequence of that."'

'"Resembling a dark cloud clad in yellow silk, why are you lying like this with limbs thrown down and body covered with blood?"'

'"You are sleeping like this while I am stricken with grief. Why are you not replying to me? I am the granddaughter of Malyavantha, a great hero who fought with Daksha. Why are you disowning me and not answering me?"'

'"Get up, Rise up. When you are insulted why are you lying down? Because you are lying down, even the radiance of the Sun has entered Lanka without fear."'

'"The iron bar of yours which is effulgent like the Sun and closely resembles the thunderbolt of Indra, with which you have terminated your enemies in the combat, which is regularly worshipped by you, which is adorned with a network of gold, is broken into thousand pieces and lies scattered."'

'"You are lying in the battlefield embracing it as if it is a loved one. Why are you not willing to answer me?"'

'"You have returned to the five elements. This heart of mine distressed with grief is not breaking into a thousand pieces."'

'Wailing in this way, eyes filled with tears, heart filled with extreme love, (Mandodari) she was in delusion.'

"In a state of unconsciousness, when Mandodari, fell on Ravana's chest, shrunk in agony, she was like a flash of lightning glowing in a rainy cloud reddened by the blow of twilight."

'The cowives who had come there weeping aloud and distressed, lifted up roaring Mandodari quickly.'

'"Devi! Not that you do not know that when fortune changes in the world, dynasty changes. Fortune is not steady."'

'While Mandodari was being counselled by the co wives like this, she was weeping, shedding tears on her breast as well as bathing her face. She once again wept making a loud sound.'

'Thereafter, Rama spoke to Vibheeshana like this." Let the obsequies be carried out and all the women comforted."'

'Then  the wise and righteous Vibheeshana thinking made a wholesome and righteous submission in the following words.'

'"This Ravana had given up righteous conduct, was cruel, merciless, untrue, and had laid hands on others\' wives. I do not deserve to perform obsequies to him.'

'"This Ravana remained doing harm to all and does not deserve the respect of his elder brother, or prayers. He is an enemy in the form of brother. He does not deserve to be worshipped.'

'"If I am not performing obsequies to my elder brother, the people in this world will call me ruthless. Again, on hearing his blemishes they will say that it is good not to do it for him."'

"On hearing Vibheeshana's words, Rama, who is good at expression, very affectionately, upholding virtues, spoke as follows to Vibheeshana."

'"O Lord of Rakshasas! You are dear to me. It is by your strength I could be victorious. I have to do some kind deed for you.'

'"This nightranger is full of unrighteousness and untrue. But he was a strong, energetic hero in combat."'

'"Though he is richly endowed with prowess, he is a tyranny to the world, who has performed a hundred sacrifices (like Indra) and never got defeated, I heard."'

'"There is no hostility after death for heroes. Let us perform his obsequies. I am also like that in this regard.'

'"Ten headed Ravana being so (knower of righteousness), he deserves your performance of his last rites as per tradition and righteously You will attain fame by doing this deed."'

"On hearing Raghava's words, Vibheeshana hastened to perform the last rites of his brother Ravana who had been killed."

'Vibheeshana entered the city of Lanka and carried out fire sacrifice quickly for Ravana, the king of Rakshasas.'

'Vibheeshana arranged to get excellent carts, fires maintained by Ravana, priests, so also sandalwood, and many kinds of wood, fragrant perfumes, sandals, sweet smelling odours, gems, pearls, and corals and proceeded with obsequies.'

'Surrounded by Rakshasas, in a short time he returned with Malyavan (Maternal uncle of Ravana) and Vibheeshana initiated the task.'

'As the dead body of Ravana was lifted up for final beatitude, panegyrists hailed him with blasts of several musical instruments and praised him with their faces bathed in tears. The golden cart was decorated with beautiful, picturesque, wonderful pictures and flags. Logs of wood were placed on the body and consecrated by sprinkling fragrant water. With Vibheeshana in the forefront, faces turned to the southern side, all proceeded.'

'Then Advarya lighted the fires that started glowing up. All the ogres paid their respects seeking refuge and followed.'

'All the women from the gynaeceum weeping aloud from all sides hastened at quick paces and followed sobbing.'

"As they advanced forth with Ravana's body, they placed it in a consecrated place. All were highly afflicted with grief. Logs of sandal wood, blocks of Padmaka wood and finally fragrant root of Usira plant, and Brahmya grass were placed on the body. It was covered with the skin of antelope. The last rites of the king were carried out with vedic rites."

'Then proceeding in sequence constructing an altar in the southeast and placing sacrificial fire in a proper place, they duly performed in honour of the ruler of Rakshasas.'

'Then they poured a ladle full of ghee mixed with curd on his shoulders and placed a cart on his feet and a wooden mortar on his thighs.'

'The learned having placed everything including wooden vessels, wooden ladle to kindle fire, wooden pestle, spoon, and all other requirements at the right place.'

'Thereafter according to tradition laid down in sastras by great Rsis, the ogres killed a cow and spread a sheet, daubed it with ghee and spread it on the body of the king of Rakshasa.'

'Then the Rakshasas along with Vibheeshana desperately, eyes dimmed with tears, covered Ravana with several clothes and decorated with garland s and sandal. They sprinkled parched grain.'

'In accordance with tradition, Vibheeshana set fire. He bathed himself and with wet clothes offered in a wet cloth, holding kusa grass a mixture of sesame seeds and water to Ravana. He prostrated to Ravana and offered his prayers with folded palms. Then he comforted the wives of Ravana and all of them to return to Lanka.'

'After the women entering the city, Vibheeshana came towards Rama and stood in a submissive manner.'

'Enemy killed, Rama also accompanied by Sugriva, Lakshmana, and army experienced joy, like Indra (who performed a hundred sacrifices) after killing Vrta.'

"In the meantime, Devas, Gandharvas, Danavas speaking to each other an auspicious story of Ravana's destruction went in their respective aerial cars."

"Speaking about the highly respected Raghava's prowess, the end of dreadful Ravana, the good fighting of Vanaras, counsel of Sugriva, valour of Hanuman, love of Lakshmana, fidelity of Sita, all rejoiced and returned as they had come."

'Bidding farewell to Matali joyously, honourable Raghava returned the aerial chariot bestowed to him by Indra.'

"Matali, charioteer of Indra too taking Raghava's permission went to heaven in that wonderful chariot."

'"On Matali ascending to heaven, Raghava very dearly embraced Sugriva for his help in his victory."'

'On embracing Sugriva, greeted by Lakshmana, and worshipped by the army of Vanaras, Rama returned to the camp.'

'And then, Kakuthsa spoke to Saumithri, of auspicious nature and endowed richly with prowess, who stood close by.'

'"Gentle Lakshmana! Vibheeshana is friendly to me and devoted. He has done me good work in the past. Consecrate him in Lanka."'

'"O gentle Lakshmana! I desire to see this Vibheeshana, Ravana\'s brother, consecrated at Lanka"'

'Great selfRaghava having spoken like that, Saumithri, very happily arranged to get a golden vessel.'

'Commanded like that, Lakshmana, endowed with mighty prowess placed that vessel in the hands of Vanara chief, who was endowed with the speed of the mind, to get water from the ocean.'

'Then the foremost of the Vanaras, endowed with the speed of mind, with all speed went and got water from the ocean.'

'Vibheeshana was made to sit on an excellent seat, surrounded by hosts of friends and dear ones. Thereafter, in the midst of Rakshasas chanting sacred verses in accordance with scriptures, Saumithri took a vessel of water and duly consecrated Vibhishana with the water in the vessel as commanded by Rama, in Lanka.'

'Thereafter all the Rakshasas and Vanaras also consecrated with extreme joy and paid tribute to Rama alone.'

'Seeing Vibheeshana consecrated and becoming a king of Lanka, all his ministers and devotees felt rejoiced.'

'Vibheeshana felt extreme felicity for attaining the kingdom given by great Rama with Lakshmana.'

"Consoling the subjects of the kingdom with good words, Vibheeshana sought Rama's presence. The people were very happy and brought curds, yellow rice grains (rice mixed with turmeric), flowers and sweets and parched grain and offered."

'Valiant Vibheeshana, who is difficult to encounter, presented the benign offerings and auspicious ones received by him to Rama and Lakshmana.'

'Rama having accomplished the task, thoughtfully pleased did not desire for the offerings, accepted them to please Vibheeshana.'

'Then Rama, seeing a heroic mountain like Hanuman, who stood there in supplicant mood greeting him with joined palms, spoke these words.'

'"O Gentle Hanuman! Taking the permission of the great king Vibheeshana, entering the city of Lanka, enquire the wellbeing of Mythili."'

'"Convey to Vaidehi that me and Lakshman and also Sugriva are doing well, and that Ravana has been killed, O Best among the eloquent."'

'Having been commanded, Hanuman offered prayers to Vibheeshana and entered Lanka.'

'The monkey, having sought the permission of Vibheeshana, entered Lanka city. Duly entering the Asoka grove, he attracted the attention of Sita, who was weak with no bath, cheerless, seated at the root of the tree, like Rohini star. After reaching the grove, he greeted Sita with folded palms and stood motionless.'

'Seeing the mighty Hanuman, who arrived quietly, she was quiet. Then she saw him and experienced joy on recognizing him'

'Gentle Hanuman, the foremost of the monkeys, seeing her started to communicate every word of Rama.'

'Hanuman said" O Vaidehi! Sri Rama accompanied by Sugriva and Lakshmana, with the help of Vibheeshana, is doing well."'

'"Noble lady! Sri Rama killed Ravana and won the enemy. He accomplished the purpose with the help of Vibheeshana, the valiant Lakshmana and the monkeys also so to speak. He inquired of your wellbeing."'

'"O noble lady! I am communicating delightful news to you. O Sita, a respectable lady and knowledgeable one, the victory is attained in the combat by the great soul Rama, by virtue of your strength and devotion."'

"'Ravana has been killed, Lanka is under our side vanquished completely. Without any sleep, with forbearance, building an extensive bridge on the great ocean, the vow has been redeemed', is Rama's message to you, said Hanuman."

'"This Lanka is under Vibheeshana, Lord of Lanka. There is no need for perturbation thinking that you are in Ravana\'s abode."'

'"You be at ease, as you are living in your own abode", said Hanuman consoling Sita. \'Vibheeshana, who is very happy, is eager and favouring to see you."'

'Hanuman having spoken in that way, Sita got up in excessive joy and could not speak naturally.'

'Then seeing Sita not answering him, the monkey chief asked her" Why are you not replying. What are you thinking?"'

'When Hanuman spoke in that way virtuous Sita was overwhelmed with joy and spoke with a voice choked with tears.'

'"No doubt that my husband is victorious is very delightful. Hearing this, I am overcome with delight and am unable to speak for a moment."'

'"Hanuman! However, I think to give you a befitting gift for this happy news. I am not able to see any."'

'"I am not able to see on this earth, a gift befitting the value of your message, which can be given to you to make you happy."'

'"Neither gold or silver or gems, not even kingdom or the three worlds are equal to what you have spoken now."'

'Spoken in that way by Vaidehi, Hanuman stood with folded palms in front of Sita and replied in delight.'

'"You alone can speak such affectionate words in this manner wishing victory and welfare of your dear husband. You are irreproachable."'

'"O gentle one! Your meaningful words full of affection are more valuable than clusters of gems or Indra, the Lord of gods."'

'"Now that the enemy is killed, Rama is happy, which means as if I have attained the rulership of gods."'

'Hearing the words of Mythili, daughter of Janaka, Hanuman spoke these auspicious words.'

'Continuing to pay tribute to Hanuman\'s words, Sita said" Your language and expression are always richly endowed with virtuous qualities, sweet and valuable, combined with eight excellences. (Eight excellences areKeenness to hear discourses, readiness to hear discourses, receptivity, retentive power, reasoning for a proposition, against a proposition, faculty of comprehension, realization of truth)."'

'"You are a praiseworthy son of wind god. In strength, righteousness, valour, vigour, prowess, skill, you are excellent. You are energetic, endowed with tolerance, forbearance, firmness, brilliance, and humility. You alone have many more qualities, no doubt."'

'Now with folded palms offering prayers to Sita, Hanuman stood without perturbation, with all humility and again spoke to Sita.'

'"I desire to kill all those Rakshasas who in the past have intimidated you indeed and whoever threatened you."'

'"O Devi! You, who were so devoted to your husband, were tormented in Asoka grove earlier. These cruel Rakshasas of hideous conduct, of fierce and distorted forms with terrible eyes addressing you in harsh words by Ravana\'s order, were heard by me."'

'"I wish to kill by all kinds of strokes, these cruel distorted forms of Rakshasas having terrible hair and fierce eyes and not to mention their violence. Permit me."'

'"These Rakshasas who have wronged, who are of dreadful appearance, I wish to hit them with fists, with feet spreading long arms, strike with blows of shanks and knees, with teeth, and torment by pulling their ears and nose. Their hair will be torn off violently, their faces will be made dry, they will be tossed up, torn with different sharp conches. Their broken bodies, heads, necks, and trunks will be thrown down and killed. Grant this boon to me."'

'"O Illustrious lady! I would like to kill the terrible forms of ogres who threatened you, in that way, I will be at and strike in many ways and destroy them", said Hanuman to Sita.'

'Hanuman having spoken like that, Sita who was fond of the desperate, thus spoke to Hanuman thinking for a while.'

'"Foremost of Vanaras! Who will be angry? Being under the command of the king and being obedient maids, they did so according to king\'s order.'



'"Mighty Armed Hanuman! Do not speak in this manner. It was my fate which was supreme. Because of my predetermined circumstances I reaped such a result. I am feeblehearted and condone the maids surely."'

'"By Ravana\'s order they threatened me so. Now with his death, they will not be threatening me."'

'"O Monkey! In olden days a bear had uttered a verse which conforms to righteousness. I shall tell you now."'



'"Sinners or noble men, having done a wrong deed and deserve death. Also noble, will show compassion and not commit harm."'

'"Rakshasas by nature are cruel in their deeds and can assume any form according to their will. No sinful actions to be done even if they do sinful actions."'

"Sita, having spoken that way to Hanuman, he, who was capable of good expression, replied as follows to Rama's consort, who was irreproachable."

'"Devi! you are the righteous wife of Rama and earned fame. Give me the right message to Rama in return. I will go."'

'Hanuman, having spoken that way to Vaidehi, daughter of Janaka, she said" I desire to see my husband."'

'On hearing Mythili, wise Hanuman spoke these words to her bringing joy to her.'

'"Now you will see Sri Rama whose countenance resembles the moon, with Lakshmana, with friends who are alive, with friends whose enemies are gone, just as Sachi, the consort of Indra, the Lord of gods saw."'

'Hanuman reached Raghava with extraordinary speed assuring Sita, who shone like Lakshmi, goddess of prosperity, and had spoken like that.'

'Highly learned Hanuman greeted and spoke meaningfully to Rama, the foremost among the wielders of bow.'

'"You ought to see that noble lady Mythili, who was immersed in grief, for whose sake these actions were started and has borne fruit."'

'"Mythili who is overcome with grief on hearing your victory, was filled with tears in her eyes and desired to see you."'

'"In an earlier occasion having known me and trusting me expressed that she desires to see Rama with Lakshmana after victory and with gratitude."'

'When Hanuman had spoken like that, Rama, the upholder of righteousness, shed tears slightly and suddenly became thoughtful.'

'Drawing a long hot breath, looking at the ground, he spoke to Vibheeshana, who was like a cloud standing there.'



'When Rama had spoken in that manner, Vibheeeshana for his part hastened to the Gynaeceum and assigned through the women to convey to Sita.'

'Then Vibheeshana, the prosperous Lord of the Rakshasas seeing Sita greeted her with palms joined together lifted it over his head (as a sign of respect).'

'"Vaidehi! Anointed with a wonderful fragrance, decked with beautiful ornaments, auspicious and ascending the palanquin, your husband desires to see you."'

'Vibheeshana, having spoken that way, Vaidehi said to the Lord of Rakshasas that she would like to see him without having a bath.'

'Hearing Sita\'s words Vibheeshana replied saying," You will and ought to do what your husband Rama has said."'

"Noble Mythili (on hearing Vibheeshana), who looked upon her husband as God, said in reply, 'Alright'."

'Thereafter Vibheeshana, making Sita to ascend the palanquin, covered with valuable clothes and guarded by numerous Rakshasas after she adorned herself in the best of ornaments and put on glowing wonderful clothes brought to Rama.'

"Knowing that Sita reached also, great Rama was seen in a meditative mood absorbed in thought. Vibheeshana announced saying, 'Sita has been brought' and greeted with folded palms, full of joy."

"On hearing that Sita had arrived, who stayed in Rakshasa's abode for long, Raghava had experienced joy, indignation, and anger, all the three at the same time."

'Raghava, analysed with in him, distressed and thinking deeply, seeing Vibheeshana close by, spoke these words.'

'"O gentle Vibheeshana, let Sita who sought my victory always be quickly brought near me."'

"On hearing Raghava's words, faithful Vibheeshana instantly assigned people to disperse from there."

'Then those who were wearing coats and turbans, holding staffs in hand, warriors started moving and dispersed.'

'The hordes of Bears, Vanaras and Rakshasas moving about all over there were driven away to a distance from the vicinity.'

'The great sound heard there was like the uproar of an ocean lashed by a storm.'

'Seeing them excited to know and dispersing, Raghava stopped them out of kindness.'

'Exhibiting anger with his gaze at the uproar, Rama addressed the highly intelligent Vibheeshana resenting their action.'

'"Why are these people being troubled without disregard for me? Stop this excitement. They are my own people."'

'"For women it is not the house, boundary wall or clothes or protective wall or screen of cloth or even this kind of royal treatment or surrounding, is the protection."'

'"The appearance of a woman in public is not condemned in times of difficulty, in straits, in conflicts, in the selection of a husband, or in sacrificial ceremonies or marriage ceremonies."'

'"Sita is in distress and in a highly miserable situation. Her appearance is no fault especially in my presence."'

'"Therefore, leaving the palanquin let Vaidehi walk on foot only towards me with the help of these Vanaras."'

'Rama having spoken clearly in that way, Vibheeshana reverently conducted Sita to Rama.'

"There upon Lakshmana, Sugriva, and Vanara Hanuman, astonished at Rama's statement, became highly distressed."

'Seeing Rama having no regard towards Sita, and his harsh gestures, Lakshmana and Sugriva discussed if Rama was displeased with Sita?'

'Mythili, also adopting modesty, shrinking into her own limbs, approached her husband followed by Vibheeshana.'

'Sita, a gentle lady, who considered her husband as God only wondered with a mixed feeling of joy and affection and looked at the gentle face of Rama.'

'Observing Mythili who stood near him, Rama started to give expression to what was in his heart.'

'"O Auspicious Sita! You are won by destruction of the enemy in the battlefield. What was worth doing has been done with all my effort."'

'"I have put an end to the indignity that I lost. I gained reward for the insult. The indignity offered by the enemy has been wiped out all at once."'

'"Now you see the result of my effort. I am successful and fulfilled my vow. Today I am independent."'

'"When you were alone you were abducted by the fickle minded Rakshasa. The fault of destiny has been won by me, a mortal by the will of god।।"'

'"What is the purpose of might however great he might be, if he is petty minded and does not wipe off the insult?"'

'"Hanuman\'s leaping across the ocean and devastating action of Lanka has yielded results now."'

'"The prowess of Sugriva and also his army, his good advice and efforts in combat have become successful."'

'"In the same way even Vibheeshana\'s hard work leaving his brother devoid of good qualities and coming to me on his own has given success."'

"Sita's broad eyes which were like that of female deer were filled with tears on hearing the words of Rama."

'Rama was already hurt and on seeing Sita who was dear to his heart nearby, he was burning with the fear of public opinion.'

'In the midst of Vanaras and Rakshasas, Rama spoke with great discomfort to Sita whose eyes were like lotus petals and hair was dark and curly and whose limbs were beautiful.'

'"That which my mind desired as a duty of a human being, to get rid of the insult has been done by killing Ravana."'

'"Though the southern quarter is difficult to assail for the world of mortals, Agastya, a realized sage, has won by the power of his austerity. In the same way I have won you."'

'"Sita! This effort in carrying out with the assistance of valiant friends is not done for your sake. Let it be known to you. I have done this to protect good conduct and my illustrious race from scandal and rid of obloquy from all sides."'

'"In the event of doubtful conduct also you are standing firmly like a glowing lamp for me suffering from sore eyes and disagreeable to me."'

'"O Janaka\'s daughter! therefore now you are permitted to go wherever to any quarter. Let you be auspicious. I have no work with you."'

'"Which eminent man born in a good race will again consciously accept a wife who lived in another\'s home?"'

'"You are thrown out of the arms of Ravana. You have been seen by him with lustful eyes, have been seen by all with evil eyes. How can one born in a great race accept you again?"'

'"The reason for winning you back is to get rid of the insult. Now I have no interest in you. You may go to the place of your choice."'

'" Auspicious one! This utterance has been thought over well today. You may go wherever you find happiness, either to Lakshmana or else to Bharata. Think well and do."'

'"Sita! You can go to Shatrughna or else Sugriva or even Rakshasa Vibheeshana, wherever you feel like to live."'

'"Sita! You are endowed with beauty and having you in his own house for so long and seeing you, how Ravana could have resisted or detained you."'

'Vaidehi heard the harsh horripilating words spoken by Rama in anger and was very much afflicted.'

"Then Mythili hearing her husband 's harsh words, in the presence of a large number of people, stayed bent with shyness."

"As if pierced by those arrowlike words, Janaka's daughter shed tears excessively, shrinking into her own limbs."

'Thereafter, wiping her face clean from flowing tears she spoke slowly in a choked voice in broken words to her husband.'

'"Hero! Why are you addressing me in such harsh unkind words in a rude manner, in a harsh tone like a common man?"'

'"O Mighty armed! I am not as you think of me, so also show me a proof of it in my past. I swear on my past."'

'"You give up judging all womankind by the path followed by vulgar women. You give up these doubts if you have examined."'

'"O Lord! I was helpless when Ravana contacted my limbs in the past. I was not acting according to my will. My fate is to be blamed and not me."'

'"That mind which is under my control is my heart and it abides in you. What can I do about my limbs when I am at others\' mercy?"'

'"Honourable Rama! If I am not understood by you despite our growing up together with love and in spite of our intimate relationship, I am done forever."'

'"King! When the great hero Hanuman was sent by you to find me in Lanka, why did you not leave me then."'

'"O hero! Had you given me up immediately on receiving your message from Vanara I would have given up my life in the presence of Hanuman there itself."'

'"O Life! If you had a doubt this exertion to you is wasteful. This fruitless hard work was perhaps not required on your part nor your friends."'

'"O tiger among kings! You also gave up yourself to anger like a weak man and adopted womanliness"'



'"When in my young age you held my hand as a mark of acceptance (in our marriage), has it not been considered by you? Has my devotion, character and chastity not been taken into account?"'

'Thus speaking, and weeping with tears, with choked throat, Sita was absorbed in her mind and piteous. She spoke to Lakshmana.'

'"Saumithri! Cure for this sorrow is only pyre. Arrange for pyre as I do not desire to live with false reproaches."'

'"When my husband is not pleased with my virtues, renounces me in the gathering of people, I have only that path for me, that is, entering fire and offering myself as oblation."'

'Spoken in that manner by Vaidehi, Lakshmana, the destroyer of enemies, overcome with indignation looked at Raghava.'

"Understanding Rama's indication from his looks, Saumithri started to prepare the earth for pyre."

'Indeed, no friend or dear could see or speak or make a request or pacify Rama. at that time.'

'Thereafter, Vaidehi, walking clockwise near Rama went round him in accordance with tradition and approached the pyre.'

'Mythili greeted the gods and brahmanas with joined palms and went near fire and again joined her palms in greeting and spoke as follows.'

'"If it is true that my heart has never slid from Raghava at all, may the fire god protect me always and so also the world witness."'

'"If in Rama\'s view, I am of impeccable conduct and so also if what he is seeing is not known to be true, let the world witness and fire god protect me."'

'\'If I have ever acted or been unfaithful at heart or in speech and did not follow a righteous path with Rama, who is a knower of all virtues, let the fire god protect me."'

'"O gods! Supreme Aditya, wind god, god of the four quarters, and also by moon, and gods presiding during day, night, twilight and so also earth, know me as a woman of good character, let the fire god protect me that way."'

'Having spoken in that way, Vaidehi went round fire fearlessly, absorbed with in herself and entered the flaming and burning fire.'

'Young and old assembled there, and the gathering of people witnessed Mythili entering the flaming and burning fire.'

'Like freshly polished gold, like shining gold ornament, in the presence of the whole world she fell into flaming and glowing fire.'

'All created beings and forms witnessed large eyed Sita descending on the golden altar, into the fire like goddess of fortune descending on her vehicle.'

'All the three worlds witnessed noble dark Sita entering the fire, like ghee offered to fire.'

'All the women who stood there fled, screaming on seeing Sita falling into fire, like the flow of ghee poured continuously into sacrificial fire reciting sacred verses by priests.'

'All the Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas of the three worlds who witnessed her falling, extolled her as if goddess was falling from heaven into hell.'

'Then righteous Rama, hearing the wailing of the people, whose eyes were dimmed with tears, remained for a moment.'

'Then king Kubera, son of Vysravana, Yama, with Devas, Indra of thousand eyes, Varuna, the god of waters, glorious six eyed MahaDeva, who has bull on his banner, the creator of all the worlds, foremost of creators, Brahma, all of them reached Lanka city and went towards Raghava.'

'Then foremost of gods adorned with ornaments in hands lifted up their long shoulders and greeted Raghava with joined palms and spoke as follows.'

'"You are the creator of the entire world, knowledgeable and the foremost Lord of the host of gods. How did you keep watching Sita falling into fire\'?'

'" Among the Vasus, you are the Rtadhama and the creator of the three worlds and the first creator and selfconstituted ruler."'

'"You are the eighth among the Rudras, fifth among the Sadhyas, two Aswins are your ears, and the sun and moon are your eyes."'

'"O Tormentor of enemies! You are at the beginning and at the end of the world. You are looking like a common man would look at Sita, when she was falling into pyre."'

'Rama the upholder of dharma and foremost and supreme god spoke after the ruler of the world had spoken to him.'

'"I am Dasharatha\'s son, a human and thinking to be Rama. Tell me O divine creator, from where and whence I am here."'

'To Kakuthsa who spoke that way, creator Brahma replied, "O Lord of truthful prowess, listen to my true submission."'

'"You are the divine self, glorious Narayana himself, wielder of discus. You are having a single tusk and a divine boar, knower of past and present."'

'"You are the imperishable Brahma in the midst or end, abiding in truth. You are dharma, all pervading four shouldered Vishnu in the world."'

'"You are the wielder of Sarang bow, subduer of enemies, a supreme person, never faced defeat, wielder of sword, Vishnu, Krishna also and mighty."'

'"You are the Karthikeya, the commander of army, village headman. You are the intellect, forbearance. You are the origin and end also. You are Vamana and destroyer of demon Madhu."'

'"You are spoken of as the creator of Indra, Mahendra himself, Padmanabha, who puts an end to combat. You are a wonderful great sage and refuge of seekers."'

'"You are the self of Vedas with its thousand branches and hundred divisions. You are the beginning of the three worlds and end. You are the selfshining. You are the Siddha among the achievers and their refuge as well as their protector."'

'"You are the form of sacrifice ritual you are worshipped by Vasat. You are the syllable OM. Only the highest of the higher know you. You are without a beginning or end. Who you are is not known to Vedas also?"'

'"You are seen in cows and brahmanas. You exist in all quarters, in the sky, mountains and rivers."'

'"You are endowed with thousand feet, glorious, with hundred heads and hundred eyes, you sustain all beings, mountains and earth."'

'"Rama, at the dissolution of the earth you are seen to live on water and sustain a huge serpent. You are supporting the three worlds, the Devas, Gandharvas and Danavas."'

'"Rama, all gods constitute your heart, Devi Saraswathi is your tongue, the gods created by Brahma are the hair on your limbs."'

'"When you close your eyelids, it becomes night and when you open it becomes day. Your perfection in action are the Vedas. Without you, there is nothing."'

'"The total world represents your body, your firmness represents the earth, your anger is fire, your grace is nobility, a sign of Srivatsa."'

'"Before you took the form of Trivikrama, and took three strides, occupied the three worlds and bound the dreadful king Bali you made Mahendra as king of heaven."'

'"Sita is goddess Lakshmi while you are Vishnu. You are Krishna. You are the Lord of created beings. In order to put an end to Ravana, you entered the mortal body on earth."'

'"Rama you are the supreme and upholder of dharma. The purpose for which you are born has been accomplished. Ravana is killed. You return to your abode happily."'

'"O God! Your valour is wonderful, your prowess never goes in vain. Your sight is a blessing, and your praise is unfailing and not gone in vain."'

'"Those mortals who are devoted to you, the supreme god, will be very successful. You are eternal, supreme being. Your devotees in this world and other world will always attain the desired results."'

"On hearing creator Brahma's address to Rama, fire god emerged picking auspicious Vaidehi in his arms."

"Then the fire god taking human form emerged from the fire immediately,with Janaka's daughter shaking off the fire sticks."

'Radiating like the rising sun, adorned with polished gold ornaments, wearing red coloured clothes, with beautiful black hair, wearing fresh flowers, being in the same young form as before, blameless Vaidehi was held in the arms of the fire god and presented to Rama.'

'Then the fire god who is a witness in the world, spoke to Rama," Here is your wife Vaidehi and she does not know any sin."'

'"Sita is of good conduct and auspicious. To you who are endowed with valour, she is faithful by speech, by intention of thought and intellect and even by glance."'

'"When she was lonely, piteous, having no control, Rakshasa Ravana, who was proud of his valour abducted her from the forest when no one was there."'

'"She was separated from you yet fully absorbed in you. She was kept in the gynaeceum secretly and guarded by frightful and ruthless Rakshasa women."'

'" Although Mythili was tempted, threatened also, she had set her mind on you only and not thought of that Rakshasa."'

'"Mythili is of untainted mind and a sinless one. Take her back without any reply, I am ordering you."'

'Then the supremely righteous Rama, who is good at speaking rejoiced at heart, his eyes filled with tears, thought for a moment.'

'Rama who is endowed with valour and firmness, and an upholder of dharma, a supreme person said to Brahma.'

'"That Sita is auspicious and has surely not done any sin is known to three worlds. But she lived long in the gynaeceum of Ravana."'

'"The people will surely say that mighty Dasharatha\'s son, Rama being lusty at heart has accepted Janaki without testing."'

'"I also know that Mythili is ever coming around me with undivided love and is devoted to me."'

'"Naturally she is selfeffulgent and can protect herself. Will Ravana be able to violate broad eyed Janakijust as the great ocean can\'t cross the bounds."'

'" As I am a follower of truth only, to convince the three worlds I was disregarding Vaidehi entering fire."'

'"It could not be possible for the evil minded Rakshasa to access or lay thoughts on Mythili who was glowing like flames of fire."'

'" Auspicious Sita would not have cared for the fortunes in the gynaeceum of Ravana. She is just like the radiance of the sun attached to the sun, attached to me and none other."'

'"Mythili is unsullied in the three worlds. Renouncing her is not feasible just as fame and as she is like my own self."'

'"You are worship worthy of the world and loving people advising me in this way. Your words of good advice are good to all and for me. I will certainly follow."'

'On hearing the sweet reply of Raghava, Lord Maheswara delivered an auspicious message.'

'"O Lotuseyed, mighty armed, broadchested, a subduer of enemies, by good luck you have performed this action."'

'"The dread of Ravana in all the worlds which caused gloom and fear has been fortunately removed by you in the war."'

'"Comforting piteous Bharata, illustrious Kausalya and Kaikeyi too, seeing Lakshmana\'s mother Sumithra, and attaining sovereignty, make relatives happy. Establishing Ikshvaku race, conducting horse sacrifice and satisfying the Lord attain highest renown by giving wealth in charity to brahmins. You, who are endowed with mighty prowess, deserve to go to heaven", said Lord Maheswara.'

'"O Kakuthsa! Here is your father, teacher in the mortal world, king Dasharatha seated in the aerial car."'

'"Liberated by you, his son, the glorious emperor has reached Indra\'s world. You with your brother Lakshmana offer your salutations to him."'

'Raghava along with Lakshmana offered salutations to his father seated on top of the aerial chariot after listening to Lord MahaDeva.'

'Raghava with his younger brother Lakshmana saw his father who was effulgent, blazing and adorned in white clothes.'

'Then Dasaratha, the ruler of the world, seated in an elevated seat in the aerial car, seeing his son who was dearer than life to him, extremely rejoiced and made Raghava sit on his lap, embraced him, and started speaking as follows.'

'"Rama separated from you, even the suras and sages honouring me in heaven does not give me happiness. It is true and I promise."'

'"Today the enemies are killed, and you have completed the exile. I am fully satisfied and experiencing joyfulness on seeing you."'

'"Those utterances of Kaikeyi with a motive to send you on exile are still hurting my heart, O Best among speakers!"'

'"Seeing you with Lakshmana and embracing you makes me happy freed from grief just as the sun freed from mist."'

'"Son! I am liberated by you today, my great son, just as Kahola who was set on righteousness was liberated by Ashtavakra."'

'"O gentle son! I did not know that the ruler of gods had sent you for the destruction of Ravana, O excellent one."'

'"Rama! Kausalya will see you, as an accomplished one, as a destroyer of enemies, on returning home from the forest and will be highly rejoiced."'

'"On reaching the city and consecrated in the kingdom as ruler of the world, people will see you as an accomplished person."'

'"I desire to see you reunited with mighty Bharata who is pure and follower of dharma."'

'"O Gentle Rama! Fourteen years have been spent in the forest with Sita and Lakshmana after my departure from life."'

'"The period of your exile has been completed, my promise has been fulfilled in the battlefield and the gods have also gratified you."'



'Dasaratha having spoken to Rama, offered salutations with joined palms and said," You are righteous. Be gracious to Bharata and Kaikeyi also."'

'"O Lord! You had spoken in such a way saying \'I disown a good son and Kaikeyi\' and cursed. May that dreadful curse not touch your son and Kaikeyi," said Rama.'

"The king (Dasharatha) saying 'so be it' and embracing Lakshmana again and saluting Rama spoke to Lakshmana as follows."

'"You have served with devotion to Rama and Sita and made me very happy. By this task you have earned the merit of righteousness."'

'"O knower of dharma! If Rama is pleased, extensive fame as well as heaven and supreme glory will be attained on this earth."'

'"O Lakshmana, the enhancer of Sumithra\'s joy, \'Be auspicious. Rama will always remain good in the service of the three worlds."'

'"This Indra and also Siddhas, supreme sages who are great souls pay respects to Rama and worship him."'

'"O Gentle! Rama, the tormentor of enemies is the unmanifest and imperishable secret, is Brahma alone. This is created by Brahma. It is the secret in the heart of gods."'

'"Videha\'s Sita, you have also earned fame by serving Rama with devotion and following the righteous path."'

'Having spoken like that to Lakshmana, looking at the daughter in law standing there with folded palms, Dasaratha addressed her saying," Daughter", gently and sweetly and said.'

'"In the event of Rama abandoning you, resentment should not be shown in this way. It is your duty to endure. Rama himself has done this to prove your purity."'

'"Daughter! that which you have done is a sign of your character. It is highly difficult to do. You will overshadow the future of other women."'

'"You need not be told about the service to your husband. Nevertheless, I am giving instruction. This Rama is supreme god for you."'

'Having admonished the two glowing sons, and Sita, Dasaratha went by aerial car to the world of Indra.'

'Mahendra, the tamer of demon Paka, spoke very affectionately to Rama, who stood with joined palms before Dasharatha who had returned.'

'"O Rama, a bull among men! Your sight was amazing, and we are happy. Please tell us the desire in your mind?"'

"Gratified by Mahendra's words, Raghava was very happy and pleased, submitting to him as follows."

'"O Lord of gods, you are one who is good at expression. If happiness has risen in, you please make my words true."'

'"The Vanaras have fought for my cause and reached the abode of Yama. Make them rise up and get them back to life."'

'"O honourable Indra! I wish to see all those Vanaras who are separated forever from their sons, and wives for my cause, delighted."'

'"They were valiant and courageous and did not care for life. They did their utmost, died and fell into adversity. Purandara! Get all of them back to life."'

'"They were fond of doing and not counted death. I seek your grace to give a boon to relieve all of them from death."'

'"Bestower of honour! I wish to see the longtailed Vanaras, and Bears rid of pain and death, enriched with strength and courage."'

'"Let the location where Vanaras lived, have flowers, roots, fruits even though out of season and rivers with pure water."'

"Hearing high souled Raghava's words, Mahendra in turn replied as follows."

'"Dear Rama! that which has been sought by you is great. Nothing has been revised by me in the past. Therefore, everything asked by you will be granted by this boon."'

'"Let those long tailed Vanaras and Bears killed by Rakshasas, whose heads and arms had been severed, duly rise to life."'

'The monkeys duly healed, so also from death, enriched with strength and power rose up like rising from sleep.'

'"Let all in that way happily get reunited and highly rejoiced, with relatives, own clan and own people get united."'

'The trees will be with blossoms and fruits even though it is unseasonal. The rivers will remain with waters.'

"All the army of Vanaras healed from the wounds, who were earlier covered with wounds and all the dead monkeys together rose up like getting up from sleep. They were amazed and started saying 'What happened'!"

'Seeing all of them fully accomplished, the best of Suras very affectionately praised Rama and Lakshmana and spoke.'

'"King, return from here to Ayodhya leaving the monkeys. Reassure Mythili, who is very dear to you and an illustrious one."'

'"Subduer of enemies! See your brothers, great souls Bharata and Satrughna devoted to you who are in grief due to your separation, see your mothers. Get consecrated. People will rejoice.'

'The thousand eyed Indra, having spoken in that way to Rama and Saumithri, delighted, they returned to heaven in an aerial car with Suras.'

'Then greeting all the jewels among gods present there, accompanied by brother Lakshmana, Kakuthsa Rama ordered all Vanaras to go home and rest.'

'Rising in the morning after comfortable rest that night, Vibheeshana saw Rama the subduer of enemies, offered salutations and asked him of the victory and spoke.'

'These lotus petal eyed women well versed in decoration are at your service. They are willing to assist you in bath. There are cosmetics for anointing your body, and clothes as well as ornaments, sandal paste etc. for you. There are garlands of several types here.'

"When Vibheeshana had spoken like that, Kakuthsa Rama replied 'you and monkeys headed by Sugriva bathe and come.'"

'"Mighty armed Bharata, righteous, giving up comforts of delicate body, resorting to truth is distressed for my cause."'

'"When the virtuous Bharata, son of Kaikeyi, is not here, why do I need bath, why so many clothes and ornaments?"'

'" As it is very difficult to return to that city, think of the path to depart."'

'When Rama had spoken in the aforesaid manner, Vibheeshana replied" O son of the ruler of the earth! I will make you reach Ayodhya in a day."'

'" An aerial car called Pushpaka, a wonderful one, which closely resembles the sun, which goes according to the will of the rider has been retained with me. It was earned by Ravana from my brother Kubera in a combat. Be auspicious. O Rama, of unequal prowess, this is retained for your cause."'

'"This aerial car which waits here which resembles a cloud, will take you to Ayodhya. Be fearless."'

'"O Wise Rama! If you permit me, and think kindly of me and remember me, and if you have affection for me stay here for a while."'

'"Rama, if all your requirements are met and you are satisfied, then you can start with your brother Lakshmana and wife Vaidehi."'

'"Rama, you should accept this hospitality from me at this one occasion, which has been arranged with affection to the army and host of friends."'

'"I request you out of my high esteem towards you and friendliness. I am your servant and not commanding you to do so."'

'On hearing Vibheeshana spoken in the aforesaid manner, Rama replied to the hearing of Rakshasas, Vanaras and all of them there.'

'"O tormentor of enemies! Hero, I am honoured by your friendship, by your efforts, and good heartedness of all of you."'

'"Ruler of Rakshasas! Not accepting your request will surely not happen. (but) my mind is hastening to see my brother Bharata."'

'"He came to Chitrakuta and on reaching bent down obediently, begged me by his words to return which I did not do. Kausalya, Sumithra and Kaikeyi and Guha also requested and the request of the citizens has been turned down.'

'Noble Vibheeshana! Please permit me to go. I am honoured by you, my friend. Do not be angry or feel sorry. Let me do my duty."'

'"O Ruler of Rakshasas, send for my aerial car. My task has been completed here. How can I continue to stay here?"'

"Rama having spoken that way, Vibheeshana the king of Rakshasas, hurriedly ordered for the aerial car. The aerial car Pushpaka's parts were decorated with golden pictures, its altars were made of cat's eye gems, its squares were fixed with pillars and shone like silver. It was surrounded on all sides with yellow pennons. It had posts and flags all over, decorated with golden lotuses. The mansions in Pushpak had networks scattered with eyeholes set with pearls like windows. It had rows of bells, surrounded on all sides which had sweet sound. The Pushpak constructed by Viswakarma was huge like mountain Meru's peak and decorated with silver and pearls. Its pavements were fixed with crystals and encrusted with cat's eye gems. The seats were excellent and had rich coverings."

'The Pushpak which could not be assailed was endowed with mind speed. Vibheeshana presented it to Rama and stood.'

'Offering to Sri Rama the Pushpak decorated with flowers to sit, Vibheeshana stood at a distance and spoke.'

"The Rakshasa king humbly offered salutation to Raghava with joined palms, quickly approached, and said, 'What is to be done'?"

'Highly brilliant Raghava was thinking and spoke in a friendly manner while Lakshmana was listening closely.'

'"Let all the forest rangers (without exception) who made effort and fought be duly honoured with valuables and several luxuries."'

'"This Lanka could be won with the help of these heroes who never turned back and fought in comb at without fear of life, O Lord of Rakshasas."'

'"These forest rangers, all of them have struggled and accomplished success. Reward them with wealth and gems."'

'"These helpless monkey troops will be content with gratitude when rewarded, O respectable Vibheeshana."'

'"If you do so you will be called as charitable and kind, not seizing wealth and as one who has gained over senses. That is why I am telling you for so long."'

'"O Ruler of men, all the army will desert a king who is devoid of virtues, lowly and who is a destructor in the battlefield."'

'Vibheeshana honoured the Vanaras with gems and valuables, after Rama had spoken like that.'

'Then on seeing the monkey troops being honoured with excellent gemsRama ascended the aerial car.'

'\ufeff', '\nIllustrious Vaidehi was abashed while she was taken in his(Hanuman’s) arms to Pushpalata while the valiant archers Lakshmana and his brother were there .'

'After duly honouring all the Vanaras, to Vibheeshana and highly courageous Sugriva, Kakuthsa spoke as follows.'

'"Bull among Vanaras! Since this work of the friend has been accomplished, you too have my permission to go where you will."'

'All that has to be done by an affectionate friend in advanced age has been done, for the fear of unrighteousness. Now you may advance with your army to Kishkinda.'

'"Vibheeshana, I would like to see you living like Indra bestowed with your own kingdom in Lanka. It will not be possible for even gods to attack you."'

'"I shall proceed to my father\'s capital, Ayodhya. You may permit me. Be auspicious. I take leave of you."'

'After Rama had spoken that way Sugriva, Vibheeshana, monkeys and Rakshasas saluted Rama and said as follows.'

'We wish to proceed with you to Ayodhya, and many wishes to go with you and range the forests and groves without anxiety.'

'"O Jewel among kings! We will see you being consecrated and see Kausalya, greet her and return back to our own house."'

'Vibheeshana and Vanaras had spoken in that way, Rama replied to Sugriva, Vibheeshana and Vanaras as follows.'

'"If I with my dear and near and together with you go to Ayodhya, that will give more happiness with Sita coming and with all of you."'

'Sugriva and the Vanaras, quickly ascended the aerial car. Vibheeshana, the king of Rakshasas and ministers all of them ascended.'

'Then Sugriva with Vanaras happily joined the wonderful Pushpaka, Vibheeshana and his ministers also ascended.'

"All the Vanaras and others having got into Kubera's Pushpaka with Rama's permission, it flew into the sky."

'Delighted and thrilled, Rama was flying in the sky in Pushpaka and with shining swans, he shone like Kubera.'

'Swan shaped Pushpak, unsurpassed in appearance like swan, making great sound started to fly with the permission of Rama.'

'Then Rama, the enhancer of the joy of Raghu race casting his gaze at the moon like face of Sita spoke.'

'"Vaidehi, you may see the peak of Trikuta which stands on Lanka in the shape of the peak of Kailasa, constructed by Viswakarma."'

'"Sita, see the mire of flesh and blood of the carnage of many monkeys and Rakshasas on the battlefield."'

'"Broad eyed Sita, there lies Ravana, the Rakshasa king, who by virtue of boon tortured people, destroyed by me on your account."'

'"There lies Kumbhakarna, the night ranger killed by me, Prahastha killed by Vanaras, DhumRaksha killed by Hanuman."'

'"There lies Vidyunmali killed by great Sushena and Ravana\'s son Indrajith killed by Lakshmana in the battlefield."'

'"There is the Rakshasa by name Vikata killed by Angada, and Virupaksha (killed by Sugriva), Mahaparsva (killed by Rshaba), Mahodara (killed by Neela), Akampana and other Rakshasas, like Trisira killed by the mighty Hanuman and Atikaya by Lakshmana and Devanthaka (by Hanuman), and Naranthaka (by Angada)."'

'"Yuddhonmatta and Matta both Rakshasa chiefs, and also Nikumbha and Kumbha, sons of Kumbhakarna (killed by Hanuman and Sugriva), and Vajradamshtra and Damshtra (killed by Angada), and Maha raksha who was difficult to encounter was killed by me in the combat."'

'" Akampana and also Sonithaksha got killed (by Dwivida), Yupaksha and Prajaghna (by Mainda and Angada)."'

'"There is Vidyujihva of dreadful appearance killed, Yajnasatru killed, and the mighty Suptaghna. Similarly Suryasatru and another Rakshasa Brahmasatru were killed. in the shape of the peak of Kailasa."'

'"Mandodari wife of Ravana, with a thousand cowives is on the seashore surrounded by associates."'

'"Charming lady! You see the seashore there, where we crossed the sea that night and slept on the shore."'

'"Broad eyed lady! Here is the bridge built on the salty ocean by Nala, which was difficult to construct."'

'"Vaidehi! See the abode of Varuna, impenetrable and immeasurable roaring aloud filled with conches and oystershells."'

'"Mythili! See the mountain which has golden caves and has risen cleaving the ocean in order to give place for Hanuman to rest while crossing the ocean."'

'"Here is a cavern where all these troops were stationed before crossing the ocean. At this place Lord MahaDeva bestowed his grace on me (before construction of the bridge)."'

'"See in the middle of the ocean a very popular spot which is worshipped by the three worlds. It is supremely sacred known by the name Sethubandha. It is capable of removing all sins. It is here that the Rakshasa king Vibhishana came to meet me."'

'"Sita! You are seeing the capital of Sugriva, beautiful Kishkinda with lovely woods. Vali was killed here by me."'

'Sita, seeing the beautiful Kishkinda city ruled by Vali, gazing at Rama timidly and through love spoke to him.'

'"O King! I wish to go to the capital city Ayodhya with you, Tara and other consorts of Sugriva, and other women, surrounded by Vanara chiefs."'

"Vaidehi having spoken like that, Raghava replied her saying 'So be it' and Raghava stopped Pushpaka at Kishkinda, looked at Sugriva and spoke as follows."

'"Sugriva, the tiger among Vanaras! Let all Vanara chiefs and all women too collected, proceed to Ayodhya. Sita desires you to go."'

'Sugriva the head of the monkeys said" all of you including women also have to go quickly."'

'When Rama of immeasurable energy had spoken in the aforesaid manner, Sugriva, the prosperous leader of Vanaras, surrounded by the monkeys entered the gynaeceum and looking at Tara said.'

'"Dear, you have been duly permitted by the great soul Raghava to go to Ayodhya with Vanaras and also women to gratify Mythili."'

'"You hasten the wives of the monkeys. Taking all of them we shall depart to Ayodhya and shall see the consorts of Dasharatha."'

"On hearing Sugriva's words, Tara of beautiful limbs spoke, summoning all women."

'Sugriva has permitted all the Vanaras to go with wives and look at Ayodhya." Dear, some kindly act will be done for us also."'

'"We shall see with all the citizens, Rama\'s entry into Ayodhya, Dasharatha\'s women and the glory of Ayodhya, everything."'

'Duly permitted, all Vanaras wives and Tara also decorated themselves according to tradition, went around the Pushpaka and looked forward to seeing Sita.'

'After Rama and all others ascended and Pushpaka rose up speedily over the Rshyamuka, gazing at Rshyamuka, Rama spoke toVaidehi.'

'"Sita! Rshyamuka is seen covered with streaks of gold minerals, glowing like clouds with lightning."'

'"Here is the place I met the Vanara king Sugriva and made an agreement to put an end to Vali."'

'"Here is seen lovely woods and Pampa waters. I lamented here, separated from you."'

'"On its bank (Pampa) I saw Sabari, who was following the righteous path. Kabhanda, of eight miles long arms, was killed by me."'

'"Sita, here is Janasthana, where a mighty tree is seen. Oh sportive lady! There the exceptionally strong and highly energetic vulture Jatayu got killed by Ravana on account of you."'

'"O excellent lady! Here is the location where Khara was killed by my straight going arrows and Dushana had fallen. Here is our hermitage covered with leaves, a well known site. It is from here that Ravana had borne you away forcibly."'

'"Here is an auspicious, beautiful Godavari with pure water. Here is also seen the hermitage of Agastya surrounded by banana plants."'

'"See the glowing hermitage of the great sage Sutikshna. Vaidehi, see Sarabhanga\'s hermitage here, where the thousand eyed Indra, the destroyer of citadels (Purandara) had come."'

'"There are seen the abodes of ascetics. Here was seen by you hermitage of Atri (whose wife Anasuya you had seen) glowing like sun and fire."'

'"In these countries was a Rakshasa, called Viradha of gigantic size who was killed by me. There is an ascetic woman Anasuya practicing virtues whom you saw."'

'"O Charming lady! See the best of the mountains Chitrakuta shining there. Kaikeyi\'s son had come here to request me to accept the kingdom."'

'"Mythili! See the wonderful woods bordering beautiful Yamuna. Glorious hermitage of Bharadwaja is seen there."'

'"There is a sacred river Ganga where several kinds of birds frequent and are filled with trees full of blossoms."'

'"See this Sringaberipura. Their lives my friend Guha. Sita, several kinds of trees full of blossoms are seen on the bank of Sarayu. See the rows of sacrificial posts."'

'Sita! My father\'s capital Ayodhya is seen. We have come here. Offer your salutations."'

'Then all the Vanaras, Vibheeshana too and Rakshasas got up and saw the delightful city.'

"After the fourteenth year of exile, on the fifth day of the bright half of lunar month Sri Rama and Lakshmana reached Bharadwaja's hermitage. They bent their heads down (as a mark of respect) and offered salutations."

'Rama and Lakshmana having greeted sage Bharadwaja who had asceticism as his wealth, enquired, saying, "Have you heard that crops have been good, Bharata is active, and mothers are doing well in Ayodhya?"'

'When Rama had spoken that way to the great sage, Bharadwaja was delighted and with a smiling look replied.'

'"Bharata is without attention to his body, wearing matted locks, placing your wooden sandals in front expecting you in the house. All is well at Ayodhya."'

'"Rama! You, who are victorious in winning enemies, have earlier on account of father\'s words, intent on following father\'s words, accepting Kaikeyi\'s words, went with Lakshmana and Sita, clad in bark clothes, giving up kingdom and all possessions, like heaven set out on foot and entered huge forest, living on roots and fruits of the forest. Seeing you, compassion arose in me."'

'"I am happy to see you coming to me, who have completed the task and won the enemies and after successful completion, you are meeting relatives and friends."'

'"Raghava, while you were sojourning at Janasthana, you experienced joy and sorrow abundantly all that is known to me."'

'"This irreproachable wife of yours was abducted by Ravana while you were engaged with the protection of all ascetics and entrusted with the care of brahmanas."'

'"O, you are a lover of rightful duty, seeing Maricha, searching Sita, appearance of Kabhanda, your going to Pampa, making friendship with Sugriva, killing of Vali, searching for Vaidehi, finding of Sita by the son of wind god, and his action, setting fire to Lanka, finding of Nalasethu, construction of bridge, delighted Vanaras, destruction of sons, relatives and vehicles of Ravana\'s army, killing of Ravana who was a thorn in the eyes of god, coming of Brahma and gods, bestowing a boon and all that is known to me by the power of my penance. My disciples in Ayodhya communicated to me."'

'"Jewel among the wielders of weapons! Now you take this water, and I shall bestow a boon to you. After taking my blessings you proceed to Ayodhya."'

'Glorious son of emperor obeying the words of Bharadwaja bending his head in reverence requested for that boon.'

'"O divine sage! Let all the trees bear fruits out of season of several kinds of many sweet and juicy, tasting nectar appear on our way as we proceed to Ayodhya."'

"When Bharadwaja promised saying, 'Be it so' and the trees on all sides grew like heavenly trees."

'"Then while we were proceeding for three yojanas on all sides the trees that did not have fruits started bearing fruits, trees that did not have blossoms started having blossoms and the trees that dried up developed leaves and began to shed honey."'

'There upon Raghava who was quick in exhibiting his prowess started thinking with his friends looking at Ayodhya (from Pushpaka).'

'Then wise and energetic Rama, thinking, casting his attention on the Vanaras, spoke to Hanuman.'

'"Chief of monkeys! Going quickly to the king\'s mansion in Ayodhya try to find out about the wellbeing of the people."'

'"Go to Sringaberipuram which is seen from the sky, meet Guha the leader of Nishadas and tell him of my inquiry and wellbeing."'

'"He will be very happy to hear that I am in good health free from anxiety. He is equal to me and my friend."'

'"Dear Guha, the king of Nishadas will tell you the way to Ayodhya and Bharata\'s nature."'

'"Please tell Bharata my words of inquiry of his wellbeing and that having accomplished my purpose I returned with my wife and Lakshmana."'

'"O powerful Hanuman! you may tell him of the abduction of Vaidehi by Ravana, my friendship with Sugriva and killing of Vali in combat."'

'"You may tell him of the search for Mythili by you, crossing the vast never decreasing stretch of water, leaping across and finding Sita."'

'" Also, about my going near ocean and his (Ocean god) appearance before me, construction of the bridge killing of Ravana."'

'" About Mahendra accompanied by Brahma and Varuna bestowing boon and by the grace of Mahadeva and meeting my father."'

'"Gentle Hanuman! tell him about my coming with Sugriva the king of Vanaras, and king of Rakshasas, Vibheeshana."'

'"Tell him that Rama , after conquering hosts of enemies, attaining unsurpassed fame, accomplished his purpose, has returned with mighty friends."'

'"Listening to Bharata, and seeing his form, expression on hearing this news and knowing his intent, checking all this you may return to me."'

'" All the information, everything to be known by his facial colour, expression, by his speech, his intention to be ascertained truly."'

'"Whose mind will not be tempted at the abundance of elephants and horses of father\'s and grandfather\'s kingdom?"'

'"If the glorious Bharata who is an enhancer of the joy of Raghus having enjoyed the kingdom for long himself, let him rule all the entire earth it is laudable."'

'"Hanuman, making an effort to know his mind you ought to come quickly before we go too far a distance."'

'Commanded like that Hanuman went speedily taking human form to Ayodhya.'

'Then Hanuman rose up just like Garuda who goes at great speed to vanquish the best of serpents.'

'Valiant Hanuman, flying through the course of the birds, through the auspicious path of the wind god, leaping across Ganga and Yamuna, reached Sringaberipuram, saw Guha, rejoiced and thus spoke charming words.'

'"Your friend Rama, truly valiant one, with his wife Sita, with Lakshmana conveys his welfare to you."'

'"Tomorrow that is the fifth lunar day, after spending the night at sage Bharadwaja\'s hermitage Raghava will see you."'

'Highly energetic Hanuman, was thrilled, overcome with happiness (that he was able to communicate to Guha) and unmindful of the fatigue, being endowed with speed and swift movement, went up.'

'He saw waters associated with Parasurama, and rivers Valukini, Varuthini, and Gomathi so also fearful woods of Sala trees and thousands of people, numerous kingdoms on the way.'

'Speeding on the journey for long distance Hanuman, the elephant among the monkeys saw women, their sons, grand sons and the old, well decorated, sporting in the gardens which were like the gardens of Indra and the gardens of Chaitraratha of Kubera with trees and close to Nandigrama, he saw trees full of blossoms.'

"' At a distance of two miles from Ayodhya, Hanuman saw Bharata living in a hermitage wearing black skin of antelope, emaciated, piteous, not clean, without any cleaning of the body, affected by the separation from brother living on fruits and roots, subdued practicing austerities, following righteous practices disciplined, soul purified by meditation, like Brahmarshi in brilliance, placing your sandals on ground ruling the earth, all the four divisions free from fear on all sides, protecting the upright, ministers, priests, united with chiefs of army stood there' (reported Hanuman)."

'The citizens (of Ayodhya) who were lovers of virtues did not enjoy any luxuries, not inclined for pleasures as the prince himself was wearing bark of trees and skin of antelope.'

"Maruti's son Hanuman offered salutations to Bharata who was seen like a supreme body of dharma itself as if he was another form of dharma."

'"That Kakuthsa for whom you are worrying and living as he was at Dandaka forest with bark tree fabric, and matted hair sent me to tell you about his welfare."'

'"O God! I will tell you some pleasant news. Give up that terrible grief. You will be reunited with your brother this moment."'

'"Rama killed Ravana and recovered Mythili. He, having accomplished the purpose, is coming with his mighty friends."'

'"Lakshmana who is endowed with extraordinary energy, and illustrious Sita accompanied by Rama will be coming as Sachi with Mahendra."'

'Hanuman having said that, the son of Kaikeyi was delighted and instantly fell on ground and lost senses by extreme joy.'

'Bharata got up in a moment and saw Hanuman, who is sweet in speech said this.'

'Glorious Bharata was overwhelmed with joy and embraced Hanuman and copious tears of joy born of joy.'

'"O Gentle Hanuman! You have come here with great compassion. Are you God or a human being? For the sweet tidings brought by you to me, I will bestow a hundred thousand cows, hundred best villages, sixteen virgin women of good conduct as wives with earrings, with shapely noses, full moon like face, golden complexioned, decked with ornaments and rich women."'

'"I am hearing the good news of my Lord returning from the forest, who was living in the great forest for many years."'

'The saying that "If a human being lives (long), for a hundred years, he will experience joy" is true and auspicious.'

'"How did the alliance of monkeys happen with Rama? Where and why? I am asking you. Tell me truly."'

'Prince Bharata seated comfortably on kusa grass asked Hanuman for all the history that happened in the forest, wishing to hear from him.'

'"O Lord, mighty armed Bharata! the boons bestowed on your mother, how Sri Rama went on exile, how king Dasharatha died out of grief of son, envoys bringing you to Ayodhya, entering the kingdom, your unwillingness to accept the sovereignty, going to Chitrakuta mountain, seeking your brother noble Rama, a scourge of enemies to accept the kingdom, renouncing the kingdom by Rama, taking his sandals, and again returning here, all this is known to you."'

'"When you had gone away the beasts and birds scared of your army got agitated and had a doleful appearance."'

'"Then he entered into dreadful Dandaka forest that was devoid of people which was crowded with lions, tigers, and deer, and trampled by the elephants."'



'"That Viradha uplifted his arms and bent his head low screamed like an elephant. The three dug up a pit and threw him into it."'

'"Both the brothers Rama and Lakshmana encountered Viradha who was difficult to attack and having completed their task, reached the beautiful hermitage of Sarabhanga in the evening."'



'"Later came an ogre called Surpanakha close by Rama. Rama indicated to mighty Lakshmana, who got up quickly and cut off her ears and nose with a sword."'

'"While the great soul Rama lived at Janasthana, he killed fourteen thousand ogres".'

'"Rama alone in a day finished fourteen thousand Rakshasas standing alone in the forefront of the combat".'

'"Mighty strong heroic ogres obstructing the penance of sages living in Dandakaranya were killed by Raghava in the combat."'

'"In the battle Rama terminated Khara and killed his elder brother Dushana and also Trisira thereafter."'

'"Then Surpanakha afflicted by Rama returned to Ravana and informed. Ravana sent dreadful Rakshasa by name Maricha, who assumed the form of deer with precious stones (on body) created a desire for it in Vaidehi."'

'"Seeing that deer Vaidehi spoke to Rama to capture it as she desired and that it was beautiful and will make the hermitage bright."'

'"Rama, wielder of bow, chased the deer and followed it chasing and attacked with his arrow."'

'"When gentle Raghava went after the deer and Lakshmana also went from there, the ten headed Ravana entered the hermitage."'



'"Standing on the mountain top, the Vanaras who were like mountains in size watched the wonderful feat of the king of Rakshasas of wonderful form taking Sita."'

'"Then the king of Rakshasas, mighty Ravana ascended with Vaidehi into the Pushpaka, an aerial car that went swiftly at the speed of the mind and entered Lanka."'

'"Ravana kept Mythili in an auspicious huge mansion with golden walls and consoled her with good words."'

'"Vaidehi did not care to talk to the chief of Rakshasas. She ignored him like a straw and stayed in the Ashoka grove."'

'"Rama returned after killing the deer. On his return Kakuthsa saw in the forest, the vulture, who was dearer than his own father, killed."'

'"Rama with Lakshmana went about searching, ranging along the banks of Godavari among the blossomed woods."'

'"While going in the huge forest the valiant and truthful Rama saw a Rakshasa by the name Kabhanda. According to Kabhanda\'s words of advice they went to Rshyamuka mountain and met Sugriva."'

'"Even before they met, they had a happy feeling at heart towards each other. Earlier Sugriva was banished by his enraged brother (Vali). On mutual talk and discussion, they both developed deep friendship."'

'"Rama of mighty arms killed Vali of gigantic body and mighty prowess and restored Sugriva\'s own kingdom to him."'

'"Sugriva attained the kingdom and established. He promised to search with all Vanaras and promised to find Sita."'

'"Vanara Lord Sugriva ordered the monkeys to go to all countries and all directions and dispatched them to find Sita."'

'"Monkeys that went to the foremost of mountains Vindhya lost their way and a lot of time and returned with intense grief."'

'"Vulture king\'s brother called Sampathi told the Vanaras positively that Sita is dwelling in Ravana\'s mansion."'

'"To dispel the grief of the Vanaras and relieve them, I resorted to my valour and leapt a hundred yojanas."'

'"There at Ashoka Grove, I saw her wearing unclean silk clothes, dirty in body, devoid of happiness, determined and staying alone."'

'"Met that irreproachable lady like that and duly enquired everything, delighted Mythili gave me a ring with Rama\'s name as a token to be given to Sri Rama."'

'"Knowing that the most difficult task has been accomplished, again I returned and gave the valuable jewel to Rama."'

'"Just as an ailing man at the end of life regains hope on drinking nectar, Sri Rama also gains hope on hearing about Mythili."'

'"Rama made war efforts to win the war for the destruction of Lanka just as fire burns at the dissolution of the worlds and to conquer Ravana."'

'"Then Nala constructed the bridge, and the monkey heroes crossed the bridge."'

'"Prahastha was killed by Nila. Rama killed Kumbhakarna. Lakshmana killed Indrajith, the son of Ravana."'

'"Then to the glorious Kakuthsa, the tormentor of enemies, Indra, Yama, and Varuna bestowed boons, so also Maheswara and Brahma, Dasharatha also reached and bestowed boons on Rama. Ascetics and suras also conferred boons."'

'"Having received boons, Rama with the Vanaras collected together reached Kishkinda by Pushpaka aerial car."'

'"He reached the bank of Ganga and is staying at the hermitage of sage. Tomorrow at the time when Pushya star is in union with the moon you will be able to see Rama without any obstruction."'

'Hearing the delightful news, Bharata of truthful prowess, the destroyer of enemies, was very happy and ordered Shatrughna.'

'"Let all gods in the temples of the capital be worshiped by people purifying themselves, duly adorned with fragrance and garlands."'

'"Let the bards well versed in singing praises, charioteers, all courtesans, in groups, artists who can play musical instruments, similarly ministers, army men, traders, service providers, Kshatriyas, brahmins so also top people, troops proceed to see the moon like face of Rama."'

'Shatrughna, a destroyer of enemies, hearing the words of Bharata, ordered for many divisions of labour and the courageous ones to come.'

'From here (Nandigrama to Ayodhya) low lying areas are to be made even and uneven areas to be levelled.'

'Let the ground be sprinkled with cold water and then parched grain and flowers to be sprinkled.'

'Let the streets of the foremost of the best cities (Ayodhya), be decorated with flags till the sun rises and houses be decorated.'

'Let hundreds of people decorate with fragrant garlands of five colours closely tied and decorate the royal paths.'

"On hearing Shatrughna's command, all the eight ministers, Dhristi, Jayanta, Vijaya, Siddhartha, Arthasadhaka, Ashoka, and Mantrapala issued forth with great joy."

'Seated on top of thousands of well decorated elephants in rut, and on the best of horses, people went (to receive Rama). Female elephants had golden girths on their waist. Best charioteers on best chariots proceeded.'

'Chiefs on horses, champions in thousands went surrounded by thousands of foot soldiers carrying javelins, spears, and nooses.'

'Then all the consorts of Dasharatha, keeping Kausalya and Sumitra in front, seated in palanquin accompanied by Kaikeyi, started from Nandigram.'

"Then the foremost of brahmins, leaders with garlands and Modaka sweets in hand, surrounded by ministers went with righteous Bharata, accompanied by bards praising, accompanied by sounds of blowing conches and drums and greeting. Bharata was emaciated due to fastings, was desperate, wearing bark fabric and skin of antelope. The great soul Bharata, knower of righteous responsibilities, greeting, experienced great joy, on hearing about the returning of the brother. Decorated with white garlands, he carried Rama's sandals on his head. His friends accompanied him and took with him a yellow umbrella adorned with gold, worthy of kings and white whisks. Bharata went to receive Sri Rama."

'The earth shook by the sounds of hooves of the horses, sounds of conches and drums, and the rattling of the chariot wheels.'

"Reviewing the arrangements, Bharata spoke these words to wind god's son, Hanuman."

'"O monkey! Indeed, you monkey being fickle minded, hope you have not resorted to your nature. I am not seeing noble Rama, the tormentor of enemies."'

'And then Bharata having spoken that way, Hanuman understood the meaning of his words and spoke thus.'

'"By the grace of Bharadwaja, all the trees have fruits shedding sweet juice, and in bloom, the Vanaras are very delighted. The forest rangers are making terrific sounds. The tormentor of enemies, endowed with all virtues, by virtue of the boon given by Indra extended hospitality to the Vanara army. I think they are crossing the river Gomathi now."'

'"See the rain of dust started at Sala Forest. Vanaras are shaking the beautiful Sala grove, I think."'

"Pushpaka is seen at a distance, resembling the moon. This wonderful Pushpaka has been created through Brahma's mind."

'"Rama\'s vehicle is amazing, and he got it by killing Ravana and his relatives. It shines brightly like the rising sun, and it speeds at the thought of mind. Kubera got this aerial car by Brahma\'s grace."'

'"Heroic Raghava brothers are there with Vaidehi, that highly energetic Sugriva and Rakshasa Vibheeshana also."'

'Then when "Sri Rama is here" was uttered a fantastic expression of joy of the women, young, youth and aged was heard, which reached the heaven.'

'Those people on the chariots, elephants and horses got down and saw them on the moon like Pushpaka.'

'Highly rejoiced, Bharata offered salutations standing as he ought to within himself and worshiped Sri Rama from a distance.'

'Sri Rama, elder brother of Bharata shone in the aerial car created by Brahma like another Indra.'

'Then Bharata offered salutations with joined palms to Sri Rama seated in the peak of Pushpaka like saluting Sun from the mountain Meru.'

"Then that excellent Pushpaka which had pictures of swans on it came down to the ground with Rama's permission."

'Bharata of unfailing valour duly permitted to ascend Pushpaka by Sri Rama, reached Rama and once again offered salutations to Rama.'

'Kakuthsa Rama happily lifting up Bharata, who came into his sight after long, on to his thigh embraced him.'

'Then the tormentor of enemies, Bharata approached Lakshmana and then greeted Vaidehi and announced his name.'

'Bharata, the son of Kaikeyi thereafter embraced Sugriva, Jambavantha, Angada, Mainda, Dwivivida, Nila and Rshaba.'

'He embraced Sushena, Nala, Gavaksha, Gandhamadana, Sarabha, Panasa who were around.'

'Then he inquired about the welfare of those Vanaras who can take any form at will, who were in human form and was delighted.'

'And thereafter highly brilliant, foremost among the righteous, prince Bharata embraced Sugriva, the bull among Vanaras and spoke.'

'"Sugriva, you are the fifth brother to four of us and should have been born like that" said Bharata. One who helps becomes friend and maleficence is a sign of an enemy.'

'And then Bharata spoke this good word. "Luckily with your help, the very difficult task was done."'

'Then hero Shatrughna and Lakshmana also greeted Rama and then worshipped Sita also.'

'Rama reached his mother who was pale and emaciated in grief and offered salutations clasping her feet in obedience and was delighted in his mind.'

'Then he greeted Sumitra, and illustrious Kaikeyi also and then all the mothers and the priests who had come.'

'"Welcome to you mighty armed Rama, enhancer of Kausalya\'s joy" saying so citizens of the city spoke with folded hand s greeting Rama.'

'The citizens in thousands greeting Rama, elder brother of Bharata lifting up their hand s with folded palms seemed like lotus buds.'

"Taking the sandals given to Bharata, the knower of dharma put on the sandals on Rama's feet by himself."

'Bharata then greeted Rama with folded palms, spoke saying, "this kingdom and everything held in trust by me is returned to you."'

'Today my life is fulfilled, my wish is completed. I am seeing you returned to Ayodhya again as king of this kingdom.'

'You may review your treasury, granary, palaces, army. Everything has increased tenfold by me by virtue of your brilliance.'

'Seeing Bharata, the lover of his brother, who spoke like that, the Vanaras, Rakshasas, and Vibheeshana shed tears.'

"Then rejoiced Raghava took Bharata on his lap and flew to Bharata's hermitage with the army."

'Raghava alighted from the top of the Pushpaka on reaching the hermitage of Bharata and stood on ground.'

'Then Rama told Pushpaka that he was permitted to go to God Vysravana.'

'That aerial car duly permitted by Rama rose up to go to Kubera and set out in the northern direction and flew.'

"That wonderful Pushpaka received from Rakshasa impelled by Rama's order speedily went to Kubera."

"Bharata, the enhancer of Kaikeyi's joy, of unfailing valour, with folded palms on head submitted to his elder brother."

'"This kingdom was bestowed on me and my mother. I return it back to you now again."'

'"I am not able to bear the heavy burden transferred to me any more like a young ox can\'t bear like a bull.'

'"If the kingdom containing vulnerable points is not protected on all sides, it can\'t stand, just as a strong rush of water can be prevented from breach only by constructing a dam.'

'"O Rama! Donkey can\'t run like horse crow can\'t run like swan. I am not able to bear the burden of kingdom like you, O tormentor of enemies."'

'"If for example you have planted a tree in your own house, it becomes huge and difficult to climb in spite of a large trunk, many branches and after flowering does not yield fruits and is withered, the person who planted will not enjoy the fruit. In that way O mighty armed Rama, you are the ruler of the people, if you would not take care of us, your dependants, I solicit you ought to understand what I mean.'

'"Raghava, let you be consecrated in the afternoon and the world will see you dazzling in brilliance like the sun today."'

'May you wake up to the sounds of musical instruments and the tinkling of ornaments worn around the waist and anklets and sweet sounds of singing.'

'As long as the stellar sphere goes round, and as long as the earth revolves around that long you enjoy the rulership of the world."'

"Hearing Bharata's words, the conqueror of enemies, Rama said 'Be it so'. Then Bharata took the auspicious seat."

"Then at the command of Shatrughna's words, experts with hand work (barbers) who had soft skills quickly surrounded Raghava."

'Bharata had his bath first, and mighty Lakshmana, Sugriva the monkey king, and Vibheeshana the Rakshasa king followed him. Sri Rama removed the matted hair, had bath, adorned with colourful garlands, and daubed with sandal paste and clothed in exquisite robes stood glowing and shining.'

'Then valiant and prosperous, Shatrughna, who is an enhancer of the glory of Ikshvaku race decorated Sri Rama and Lakshmana (duly with ornaments).'

"Then all the nobleminded Dasharatha's wives themselves decorated Sita beautifully."

'The very delighted Kausalya, lover of her sons started making effort to decorate the wives of all Vanaras in a splendid manner.'

'Then Sumantra the charioteer, commanded by Shatrughna came there with all parts of the chariot decorated and yoked.'

'Seeing the wonderful chariot like the radiance of the planet sun, mighty armed Rama the conqueror of hostile enemies ascended.'

'Sugriva and Hanuman having bathed wore sparkling earrings, clothed in heavenly robes vied with Mahendra in splendour, started.'

"Sugriva's wife and Sita decked with all kinds of ornaments and earrings, enthused to see the city, started."

"At Ayodhya also, king Dasharatha's ministers, priests started to Vasishta and thought of the required arrangements."

'Ashoka, Vijaya, Siddhartha, collected together and started consulting with each other for the growth of Rama and the City.'

"For the success of the great soul Rama's consecration, whatever was auspicious, all that ought to be done as he deserves."

'All those ministers, priests thus communicating with each other, speedily set forth to have a glance at Sri Rama.'

'Like the thousand eyed Indra seated in the excellent chariot yoked to green horses, the sinless Rama departed to the city.'

'Bharata held the reins, Shatrughna took hold of the parasol, Lakshmana standing in front held the fan, and the Rakshasa king Vibheeshana held a white whisk which was like a moon for driving the air.'

'Then the host of sages, Rudras and gods from the heaven started praising Rama with sweet sounding chanting.'

'Then resplendent Sugriva, the bull among Vanaras, ascended the mountain like elephant by the name Satrumjaya.'

'Assuming human semblance, the Vanaras adorned with ornaments ascended nine thousand elephants and departed.'

'Sri Rama the tiger among men went accompanied by sounds of blasts of conches and shouts and roll of drums along the rows of mansions in the city.'

'Then they saw all those who had gone to Ayodhya coming in advance in accordance with tradition, to receive Rama, the great car warrior, who was shining brightly advancing by the chariot.'

'They were blessing Sri Rama in turn and Rama responded to them very happily. Surrounded by brothers and all followed Rama the great soul.'

'Surrounded by ministers, brahmins and common people, glorious Rama shone brightly like the moon surrounded by stars.'

'He went forward surrounded by bands, trumpets, wooden cymbals and swastikas and very happily singing auspicious festive songs.'

'Taking yellow rice (rice smeared with turmeric) appearing like gold, cows, virgin women, brahmins with Modakas in hand went before Rama.'

'Rama narrated about his friendship with Sugriva and the distinct performance of Hanuman and Vanaras to the ministers.'

'Hearing about the action of Vanaras and the strength of Rakshasas, the citizens of Ayodhya were astonished.'

"Sri Rama narrated about Vibheeshana's friendship to the ministers. Splendorous Rama then entered Ayodhya filled with very happy people accompanied by Vanaras."

'The citizens of Ayodhya held the flags up in every house. Thereupon Rama reached the beautiful home of his father, the abode of the Ikshvaku dynasty.'

"And thereafter prince Rama, the joy of Raghus, the great soul reached father's mansion and then to Kausalya's and to Sumitra, to Kaikeyi and greeted them. He then spoke meaningful words to virtuous Bharata in a sweet tone."

"Let the splendid, excellent mansion attached to Ashoka grove, encrusted with cat's eye gems and pearls be placed at the disposal of Sugriva."

'Then that upright Bharata hearing the words of Rama taking the hand of Sugriva led him to that temple like abode.'

'Then as commanded by Shatrughna, people taking glowing oil lamps and coverlets for the couches quickly entered the palace.'

'Highly brilliant Sugriva said to Bharata, "Let envoys be sent for the consecration of Rama."'

'Sugriva instantly gave four golden pots decorated well to the four Vanara leaders.'

'Sugriva gave four pots to the four of the Vanaras to get them filled with the water of the four oceans and get them by early morning and said to await for him.'

'Having spoken like that by Sugriva, the Vanaras of mountainlike forms fled like Garuda into the sky quickly.'

'Jambavan, Hanuman, Vegadarsa and Rshaba brought pots of water from the seas. Another five hundred monkeys brought five hundred pots from five hundred rivers of the country. Jambavan richly endowed with courage brought in a pot encrusted with all kinds of gems. Sushena brought water from the eastern sea.'

'Rshaba quickly brought water from the southern sea in a golden pot covered with sandal paste.'

'Gavaya, an expert like WindGod brought cold water from the abode of Varuna in the west, in a pot encrusted with gems.'

'Nala who vied with Garuda in speed, a righteous one, endowed with all virtues quickly brought water from the north.'

"Then seeing the water brought by the monkeys for Rama's consecration Shatrugna along with ministers placed them at the disposal of the supreme priest along with friends."

'Then accompanied by brahmins, sage Vasishta, active though aged, asked Sita and Sri Rama to occupy the plank made with full of precious stones.'

'Eight sages, Vasishta, Vama Deva, Jabali, Kasyapa, Katyayana, Suyajna, Gautama and Vijaya consecrated Sri Rama, the tiger among men, with pure fragrant waters as the Vasus consecrated the thousand eyed Indra.'

'First by priests, followed by brahmins, virgin women, so also ministers, merchants, warriors consecrated. Those who stood in the sky, the gods, the rulers of the four quarters, and all gods consecrated by sprinkling water containing medicinal herbs. All were very delighted.'

'In the past, Manu was consecrated with a crown encrusted with gems crafted by Brahma and it was adorned at consecration by successive kings. After the consecration, Rama was dazzling seated on a throne made of several kinds of gems as per tradition. The council hall was also made of gold with charming pictures and looked splendid. The great soul Raghava was crowned and adorned with ornaments by Vasishta and the priests.'

'Shatrughna held white auspicious parasol, Sugriva the Vanara Lord held a white whisk, Vibheeshana the Lord of Rakshasas held a white whisk shining like the moon.'

'The WindGod prompted by deity Indra presented a dazzling golden garland of hundred flowers to Raghava.'

'Urged by Indra the wind god gave a dazzling pearls chain intercepted by several kinds of gems and precious stones to the ruler of the world.'

"The Gandharvas from among the gods sang and Apsara groups danced for Rama's consecration."

"At the time of celebration of Rama's coronation, earth became green with crops, trees bore fruits and filled with flowers which spread fragrance."

'Sri Rama, the bull among men gave first, a hundred thousand cows with just born calves to hundred thousand brahmins.'

'Raghava again gave brahmins thirty crores of golden coins and different kinds of ornaments and clothes.'

"Sri Rama gave a wonderful golden garland with a stretch of gems tied to it which was dazzling like the sun's rays to Sugriva."

"Very lovingly Rama gave Angada the son of Vali, wonderful armlets encrusted with cat's eye stones and precious gems."

'Rama gave Sita an unsurpassed pearl chain (given to him by the wind god) encrusted with the best of gems and corals wonderfully shining like moonbeams. And Sita looking at Rama presented that immaculate wonderful pearl chain, and splendid clothes with some ornaments to Hanuman.'

'Removing the pearl chain from her neck, Janaki looked at all the monkeys as well as her husband again and again.'

'Seeing Janaki looking at him, Rama who could read her mind, and said" Lovely Sita, Beautiful young lady, give the pearl chain to one with whom you are pleased." Sita you may give the chain to one in whom you always found to have brilliance, determination, fame, dexterity, capacity, modesty, prudence, virility, prowess, and intelligence always.'

'Blackeyed Sita, gave that chain to Hanuman, the bull among Vanaras who shone like a mountain behind white silver like cloud.'

'Then Sri Rama, the tormentor of enemies, the ruler of the earth looking at Mainda, Dwivida and Neela presented articles according to their desires. For the aged among the Vanaras and the foremost Vanaras, he gave ornaments and garments duly as much as they deserved and worshipped.'

'And thereafter Vibheeshana, Sugriva, Hanuman, Jambavan, all Vanara chiefs of unwearied action having received gifts, abundant gems, and desired objects as they deserved from Rama. They worshipped Rama and very delighted at heart went to their respective places.'

'All the high souled bulls among Vanaras, lauded by the ruler of the earth departed to Kishkinda after seeing the great celebration.'

"Sugriva, the foremost of the Vanaras having seen Rama's coronation and been honoured, entered Kishkinda."

'Vibheeshana, the bull of Rakshasas, of great fame and a righteous king, having received family fortune departed to Lanka.'

'Highly renowned and generous Raghava, putting an end to enemies ruled the entire kingdom with great joy. He said to Lakshmana who was a lover of duty and knower of dharma.'

'"Lakshmana! You are a knower of dharma and a lover of dharma. Prior to my consecration, this kingdom was ruled by former kings, fathers, and forefathers also with the help of the army. You bear the burden equally with me by being installed as Prince Regent", said Rama.'

'When Saumithri was compelled repeatedly to accept the position of Prince Regent by the high soul great Rama, he had not accepted. Rama consecrated Bharata as Prince Regent.'

'Rama, the son of Dasharatha, had performed many a time Pundarika, Aswamedha, Vajapeya and several other yajnas and propitiated gods.'

'Raghava in the ten thousand years of his rule performed hundred horse sacrifices with excellent horses and gave donations liberally.'

'Sri Rama whose arms reached unto knees, endowed with broadchest and stupendous glory, ruled this earth with Lakshmana as his follower.'

'Righteous Rama also, having inherited the kingdom, conducted several sacrifices with brothers, friends and relatives.'

'While Rama was ruling there was no lamentation of widows (over their loss), fear of cruel animals, or fear of disease.'

'There were no thieves, indeed there was no loss, aged did not perform obsequies (no deaths in the young population) for the young and no harm to people.'

'All were happy, and followed the righteous path, looking at Rama alone and no one hit another.'

'While Rama was ruling for thousands of years, people were blessed with thousands of sons and lived free from trouble and sorrow.'

'While Rama was ruling the kingdom, everything was Rama, Rama, and Rama. People spoke stories of Rama and the world was resonating with Rama.'

'The trees were always in bloom, and always bore fruits. Clouds sent rain when desired. People lived with delightful feelings.'

'While Rama ruled brahmins, kshatriyas, vaisyas and sudras were free from avarice, were engaged in their own avocations and delighted. People remained righteous, pious, and never told lies.'

'All were endowed with signs of good culture, given to righteous behaviour. Rama ruled the kingdom for ten thousand years with brothers.'

'He who reads, listens to this first epic, a noble text composed by Valmiki will be blessed, attain fame, enjoy long life and victory in this world and will be rid of sins.'

"On hearing about Rama's consecration, in this world, one who is seeking sons will get sons, one who is desirous of wealth will attain wealth, kings will overcome enemies and conquer earth."

"Women listening to Ramayana will have Kausalya's Rama, Sumitra's Lakshmana, Kaikeyi's Bharata as living sons and will be always happy and blessed with sons and grandsons."

'He who listens to Ramayana, the story of Rama of unwearied action will be victorious and blessed with long life.'

'He who listens with devotion, this epic composed by sage Valmiki in the past, will conquer anger and overcome difficulties.'

'Whoever listens to this epic written in the past by sage Valmiki will be united with relations and rejoice with them.'

'Those who listen well to Ramayana will obtain all boons here in this world and all gods will be pleased.'

'The god who removes obstacles will be staying in peace in the house where Ramayana is there. The kings listening to Ramayana will conquer the world and those gone out of home will return back safe.'

'Women listening to Ramayana prior to pregnancy will deliver sons. This ancient epic if worshipped or read, one will get rid of all sins and attain long life.'

'A kshatriya should always offer salutations with his head bent down before listening to Ramayana from a brahmin. Such a kshatriya will obtain kingship and also beget sons in future. There is no doubt.'

'Rama is said to be ever pleased with him who listens or reads the Ramayana daily. Foremost of Raghus, the mighty armed Rama is eternal Lord Vishnu himself. He is Hari, the ruler Narayana and Lakshmana is Sesha.'

'This way Ramayana is the ancient narration. Read it daily with trust and devotion. You be auspicious and let the strength of Vishnu grow in you.'

'By grasping and listening to Ramayana, all gods will be delighted, ancestors will be pleased.'

'Residence in heaven is assured for those who transcribe this Ramayana with devotion and full of meaning, composed by the great sage.'

"Listening to this great auspicious epic will result in the growth of the family, excellent women, augmentation of wealth and grains and comfort on the earth and accomplishment of one's objectives."

